The Project Gutenberg eBook of Old-time recipes for home made wines, cordials and liqueurs from fruits, flowers, vegetables, and shrubs
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Old-time recipes for home made wines, cordials and liqueurs from fruits, flowers, vegetables, and shrubs

Compiler: Helen S. Wright

Release date: March 25, 2025 [eBook #75708]

Language: English

Original publication: Boston: The Page Company, 1909

Credits: Tim Miller, Les Galloway and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OLD-TIME RECIPES FOR HOME MADE WINES, CORDIALS AND LIQUEURS FROM FRUITS, FLOWERS, VEGETABLES, AND SHRUBS ***


                          Transcriber’s Notes

Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. Variations
in hyphenation remain but all other spelling and punctuation remains
unchanged. Italics are represented thus _italic_.




                 Old-Time Recipes for Home Made Wines




                           Old-Time Recipes for
                             Home Made Wines
                          Cordials and Liqueurs
                              From Fruits,
                      Flowers, Vegetables, and Shrubs

                      Compiled by Helen S. Wright


                            BOSTON THE PAGE
                          COMPANY Publishers




          _Copyright, 1909_ BY DANA ESTES & COMPANY

                         _All rights reserved_


                           Made in U. S. A.


                     Second Impression, July, 1919
                   Third Impression, September, 1919
                   Fourth Impression, January, 1922


                   PRINTED BY C. H. SIMONDS COMPANY
                        BOSTON, MASS., U.S.A.




 I wish to acknowledge my indebtedness to the following books of
reference: “The Compleat Housewife,” “The Cook,” “The Dictionary of
Every-day Wants,” “The Household Cyclopedia,” “The Blue Grass Cook
Book,” “Two Hundred Recipes from French Cookery.”




                 Old-Time Recipes for Home Made Wines




                             INTRODUCTION


The idea of compiling this little volume occurred to me while on a
visit to some friends at their summer home in a quaint New England
village. The little town had once been a thriving seaport, but now
consisted of hardly more than a dozen old-fashioned Colonial houses
facing each other along one broad, well-kept street. A few blind lanes
led to less pretentious homes; and still farther back farmhouses dotted
the landscape and broke the dead line of the horizon.

For peace, contentment, and quiet serenity of life, this little village
might have been Arcadia; the surrounding country, the land of Beulah.

The ladies of the Great Houses, as the villagers called the few
Colonial mansions, were invariably spinsters or widows of uncertain
years, the last descendants of a long line of sea captains and
prosperous mariners, to whom the heritage of these old homes, rich
with their time-honored furnishings and curios, served to keep warm
the cockles of kindly hearts, which extended to the stranger that
traditional hospitality which makes the whole world kin.

The social customs of this Adamless Eden were precise and formal. As
with the dear ladies of Cranford, a call was a very serious affair,
given and received with great gravity, and had its time limit set
with strict punctuality. Cake and wine were invariably served as a
preliminary warning toward early departure. Here came in my first
acquaintance with many varieties of home-made wines, over whose wealth
of color and delicacy of flavor my eyes and palate longed to linger.

Vulgar curiosity made me bold to inquire the names of a few; imagine my
astonishment when graciously told that the gay dandelion, the modest
daisy, the blushing currant, had one and all contributed their nectar
to the joy of the occasion. Flattered by my interest, my gentle hostess
broke strict rules of etiquette and invited me to linger, showing me
rare old gardens aglow with flowers, fruits, and vegetables that in due
time would contribute to their store, and at parting various time-worn
recipes were urged upon me, with verbal instructions and injunctions
upon the best methods of putting them to test.

From this beginning I ferreted out from other sources recipes for
many curious concoctions, the very name of which fills the mind with
fantasies and pictures of the long ago. Do we not feel poignant
sympathy for the grief of the poor Widow of Malabar, whose flow of
tears has descended in spirit, through three centuries, to those still
faithful to her memory? Did we ever pause to consider what a slaughter
of the innocents went to make famous many an old English tavern whose
Sign of the Cock made the weary traveller pause and draw rein, and call
loudly for the stirrup cup of this home-brewed ale? Can we not feel
the ponderous presence, and smell the strong tobacco from the pipes
of groups of stolid Dutchmen, of the days of Wouter Van Twiller, when
we read of that one-time favorite beverage, Schiedam Schnapps? Again,
are we not back in that dull, but delightful, society of the days of
Colonel Newcome, when a quiet game of bezique was interrupted by the
tidy servant who brought in the refreshing Orgeat and delicate seed
cakes? Have not our own grandmothers boasted of the delicious flavor of
old English Cowslip wine or Noyean Cordial?

I have confined myself exclusively to home-made beverages, gathering my
fruits and flowers from old-fashioned, homely gardens. I leave to your
imagination the times, fashions, and customs they recall. The aroma
that clings to them is subtle. Age has blended and mellowed all that
was crude in those bygone days.

With a gentle hand I tie my little bunch together and present you my
bouquet.


       *       *       *       *       *


The best method of making these wines is to boil the ingredients,
and ferment with yeast. Boiling makes the wine more soft and mellow.
Some, however, mix the juice, or juice and fruit, with sugar and water
unboiled, and leave the ingredients to ferment spontaneously. Your
fruit should always be prime, and gathered dry, and picked clean from
stalks, etc. The lees of wine are valuable for distillation, or making
vinegar. When wine is put in the cask the fermentation will be renewed.
Clear away the yeast as it rises, and fill up with wine, for which
purpose a small quantity should be reserved. If brandy is to be added,
it must be when the fermentation has nearly subsided, that is, when no
more yeast is thrown up at the bung-hole, and when the hissing noise is
not very perceptible; then mix a quart of brandy with a pound of honey,
pour into the cask, and paste stiff brown paper over the bung-hole.
Allow no hole for a vent peg, lest it should once be forgotten, and the
whole cask of wine be spoiled. If the wine wants vent it will be sure
to burst the paper; if not the paper will sufficiently exclude the air.
Once a week or so it may be looked to; if the paper is burst, renew it,
and continue to do so until it remains clear and dry.

A great difference of opinion prevails as to racking the wine, or
suffering it to remain on the lees. Those who adopt the former plan do
it at the end of six months; draw off the wine perfectly clear, and put
it into a fresh cask, in which it is to remain six months, and then be
bottled. If this plan is adopted, it may be better, instead of putting
the brandy and honey in the first cask, to put it in that in which the
wine is to be racked; but on the whole, it is, perhaps, preferable to
leave the wine a year in the first cask, and then bottle it at once.

All British wines improve in the cask more than in the bottle. Have
very nice clear and dry bottles; do not fill them too high. Good soft
corks, made supple by soaking in a little of the wine; press them in,
but do not knock. Keep the bottles lying in sawdust. This plan will
apply equally well to raspberries, cherries, mulberries, and all kinds
of ripe summer fruits.


                          COLORING FOR WINES

One pound of white sugar. Put into an iron kettle, let boil, and burn
to a red black, and thick; remove from the fire, and add a little hot
water, to keep it from hardening as it cools; then bottle for use.


                          FINING OR CLEARING

For fining or clearing the wine use one quarter pound of isinglass,
dissolved in a portion of the wine, to a barrel. This must be put in
after the fermentation is over, and should be added gently at the
bung-hole, and managed so as to spread as much as possible over the
upper surface of the liquid; the intention being that the isinglass
should unite with impurities and carry them with it to the bottom.


                            TO FLAVOR WINE

When the vinous fermentation is about half-over, the flavoring
ingredients are to be put into the vat and well stirred into the
contents. If almonds form a component part, they are first to be beaten
to a paste and mixed with a pint or two of the must. Nutmegs, cinnamon,
ginger, seeds, etc., should, before they are put into the vat, be
reduced to powder, and mixed with some of the must.


                            TO MELLOW WINE

Wine, either in bottle or wood, will mellow much quicker when only
covered with pieces of bladder well secured, than with corks or bungs.
The bladder allows the watery particles to escape, but is impervious to
alcohol.


               TO REMOVE THE TASTE OF THE CASK FROM WINE

Finest oil of olives, one pound. Put it into the hogshead, bung close,
and roll it about, or otherwise well agitate it, for three or four
hours, then gib, and allow it to settle. The olive oil will gradually
rise to the top and carry the ill flavor with it.


                     TO REMOVE ROPINESS FROM WINE

Add a little catechu or a small quantity of the bruised berries of the
mountain ash.


                  TO RESTORE WINE WHEN SOUR OR SHARP

1. Fill a bag with leek-seed, or of leaves or twisters of vine, and put
either of them to infuse in the cask.

2. Put a small quantity of powdered charcoal in the wine, shake it, and
after it has remained still for forty-eight hours, decant steadily.


                          TO MAKE APPLE WINE

To every gallon of apple juice, immediately as it comes from the press,
add two pounds of common loaf sugar; boil it as long as any scum rises,
then strain it through a sieve, and let it cool. Add some good yeast,
and stir it well. Let it work in the tub for two or three weeks, or
till the head begins to flatten; then skim off the head, drain it
clear off and tun it. When made a year, rack it off and fine it with
isinglass; then add one-half pint of the best rectified spirit of wine
or a pint of French brandy to every eight gallons.


                             APRICOCK WINE

Take three pounds of sugar, and three quarts of water; let them boil
together and skim it well. Then put in six pounds of apricocks, pared
and stoned, and let them boil until they are tender; then take them up
and when the liquor is cold bottle it up. You may if you please, after
you have taken out the apricocks, let the liquor have one boil with a
sprig of flowered clary in it; the apricocks make marmalade, and are
very good for preserves.


                               BALM WINE

Take ten pounds of sugar, six quarts of water, boil it gently for two
hours; skim it well and put it into a tub to cool. Take three-quarters
pound of the tops of balm, bruise them, and put them into a barrel with
a little new yeast, and when the liquor is cold, pour it on the balm.
Stir it well together, and let it stand twenty-four hours, stirring it
often. Then close it up and let it stand six weeks. Then rack it off
and put a lump of sugar into every bottle. Cork it well, and it will be
better the second year than the first.


                          TO MAKE BARLEY WINE

Take one-half pound of French barley and boil it in three waters, and
save three pints of the last water, and mix it with one quart of white
wine, one-half pint of borage water, as much clary water, a little
red rose-water, the juice of five or six lemons, three-quarters pound
of fine sugar, the thin yellow rind of a lemon. Brew all these quick
together, run it through a strainer, and bottle it up. It is pleasant
in hot weather, and very good in fevers.


                 TO MAKE BEER AND ALE FROM PEA-SHELLS

Fill a boiler with green shells of peas, pour on water till it rises
half an inch above the shells, and simmer for three hours. Strain off
the liquor, and add a strong decoction of wood-sage, or hops, so as to
render it pleasantly bitter; ferment with yeast, and bottle.


                              BIRCH WINE

The liquor of the birch-tree is to be obtained in the month of March,
when the sap begins to ascend. One foot from the ground bore a hole in
each tree, large enough to admit a faucet, and set a vessel under; the
liquor will run for two or three days without hurting the tree. Having
obtained a sufficient quantity, stop the holes with pegs. To each
gallon of the liquor add one quart of honey, or two and one-half pounds
of sugar. Boil together one hour, stirring it well. A few cloves may be
added for flavor, or the rind of a lemon or two; and by all means one
ounce of hops to four and one-half gallons of wine.

Work it with yeast, tun, and refine with isinglass. Two months after
making, it may be drawn off and bottled, and in two months more will be
fit for use, but will improve by keeping.


                            BLACKBERRY WINE

Bruise the berries well with the hands. To one gallon of fruit, add
one-half gallon of water, and let stand overnight. Strain and measure,
and to each gallon of juice add two and one-half pounds of sugar.
Put in cask and let ferment. Tack thin muslin over top, and when
fermentation stops, pour into jugs or kegs. Wine keeps best in kegs.


                            BLACKBERRY WINE

                       (OTHER METHODS OF MAKING)

1. Having procured berries that are fully ripe, put them into a tub or
pan with a tap to it, and pour upon them as much boiling water as will
just cover them. As soon as the heat will permit the hand to be put
into the vessel, bruise them well till all the berries are broken. Then
let them stand covered till the berries begin to rise toward the top,
which they usually do in three or four days. Then draw off the clear
liquor into another vessel, and add to every ten quarts of this liquor
four pounds of sugar. Stir it well, and let it stand to work a week or
ten days; then filter it through a flannel jelly-bag into a cask. Take
now four ounces of isinglass and lay it to steep for twelve hours in
one pint of blackberry juice. The next morning boil it over a slow fire
for one-half hour with one quart or three pints more juice, and pour it
into the cask. When cool, rouse it well, and leave it to settle for a
few days, then rack it off into a clean cask, and bung it down.

2. The following is said to be an excellent recipe for the manufacture
of a superior wine from blackberries: Measure your berries, and bruise
them; to every gallon, add one quart of boiling water. Let the mixture
stand twenty-four hours, stirring occasionally; then strain off the
liquor into a cask, to every gallon adding two pounds of sugar. Cork
tight and let stand till the following October, and you will have wine
ready for use, without any further straining or boiling, that will make
lips smack, as they never smacked under similar influence before.

3. Gather when ripe, on a dry day. Put into a vessel, with the head
out, and a tap fitted near the bottom; pour on them boiling water
to cover them. Mash the berries with your hands, and let them stand
covered till the pulp rises to the top and forms a crust, in three or
four days. Then draw off the fluid into another vessel, and to every
gallon add one pound of sugar. Mix well, and put into a cask, to work
for a week or ten days, and throw off any remaining lees, keeping the
cask well filled, particularly at the commencement. When the working
has ceased, bung it down; after six to twelve months, it may be bottled.


                           FINE BRANDY SHRUB

Take one ounce of citric acid, one pint of porter, one and one-half
pints of raisin wine, one gill of orange-flower water, one gallon of
good brandy, two and one-quarter quarts of water. First, dissolve the
citric acid in the water, then add to it the brandy; next, mix the
raisin wine, porter, and orange-flower water together; and lastly, mix
the whole, and in a week or ten days it will be ready for drinking and
of a very mellow flavor.


                          AMERICAN CHAMPAGNE

Seven quarts good cider (crab-apple cider is the best), one pint best
fourth-proof brandy, one quart genuine champagne wine, one quart milk,
one-half ounce of bitartrate of potassa. Mix and let stand a short
time; bottle while fermenting. An excellent imitation.


                             CHAMPAGNE CUP

To two ounces of powdered loaf sugar, put the juice and rind of one
lemon pared thin; pour over these a large glass of dry sherry, and let
it stand for an hour; then add one bottle of sparkling champagne and
one bottle of soda water, a thin slice of fresh cucumber with the rind
on, a sprig of borage or balm, and pour on blocks of clear ice.


                           BRITISH CHAMPAGNE

To every five pounds of rhubarb, when sliced and bruised, put one
gallon of cold spring water. Let it stand three days, stirring two or
three times every day; then press and strain it through a sieve, and to
every gallon of liquor, put three and one-half pounds of loaf sugar.
Stir it well, and when melted, barrel it. When it has done working,
bung it up close, first suspending a muslin bag with isinglass from
the bung into the barrel. To eight gallons of liquor, put two ounces
of isinglass. In six months bottle it and wire the bottles; let them
stand up for the first month, then lay four or five down lengthways
for a week, and if none burst, all may be laid down. Should a large
quantity be made, it must remain longer in cask. It may be colored pink
by putting in a quart of raspberry juice. It will keep for many years.


                          BURGUNDY CHAMPAGNE

Fourteen pounds loaf sugar, twelve pounds brown sugar (pale), ten
gallons warm water, one ounce white tartar. Mix, and at a proper
temperature add one pint yeast. Afterwards, add one gallon sweet
cider, two or three bitter almonds (bruised), one quart pale spirit,
one-eighth ounce orris powder.


                            CHAMPAGNE CIDER

Champagne cider is made as follows: To five gallons of good cider put
three pints of strained honey, or one and one-eighth pounds of good
white sugar. Stir well and set it aside for a week. Clarify the cider
with one-half gill of skimmed milk, or one teaspoonful of dissolved
isinglass, and add one and one-half pints of pure spirits. After two
or three days bottle the clear cider, and it will become sparkling.
In order to produce a slow fermentation, the casks containing the
fermenting liquor must be bunged up tight. It is a great object to
retain much of the carbonic gas in the cider, so as to develop itself
after being bottled.


                        CHAMPAGNE CIDER, NO. 2

One hogshead good pale vinous cider, three gallons proof spirit (pale),
fourteen pounds honey or sugar. Mix, and let them remain together in
a temperate situation for one month; then add one quart orange-flower
water, and fine it down with one-half gallon skimmed milk. This
will be very pale; and a similar article, when bottled in champagne
bottles, silvered and labelled, has been often sold to the ignorant for
champagne. It opens very brisk, if managed properly.


                      TO MAKE ENGLISH CHAMPAGNE,
                       OR THE FINE CURRANT WINE

Take to three gallons of water nine pounds of Lisbon sugar; boil the
water and sugar one-half hour, skim it clean. Then have one gallon of
currants picked, but not bruised. Pour the liquor boiling hot over
them, and when cold, work it with one-half pint of balm two days; then
pour it through a flannel or sieve; then put it into a barrel fit for
it, with one-half ounce of isinglass well bruised. When it has done
working, stop it close for a month. Then bottle it, and in every
bottle put a very small lump of double refined sugar. This is excellent
wine, and has a beautiful color.


                            SHAM CHAMPAGNE

One lemon sliced, one tablespoon tartaric acid, one ounce of
race-ginger, one and one-half pounds sugar, two and one-half gallons
of boiling water poured on the above. When blood warm, add one gill of
distillery yeast, or two gills of home-brewed. Let it stand in the sun
through the day. When cold, in the evening, bottle, cork, and wire it.
In two days it is ready for use.


                    CHEAP AND AGREEABLE TABLE BEER

Take four and one-half gallons of water and boil one half, putting
the other into a barrel; add the boiling water to the cold with one
quart of molasses and a little yeast. Keep the bung-hole open until
fermentation ceases.


                             CHERRY BOUNCE

Four quarts of wild cherries stemmed and well washed, four quarts
of water. (I put mine in a big yellow bowl, and cover with double
cheese-cloth, and set behind the kitchen stove for two weeks.) Skim
every few days. Then strain, add three-quarters pound sugar to each
quart of liquid, and let ferment again. This takes about two weeks.
When it stops working, add rum,—about two bottles full for this
quantity. (It is good without any rum.)


                         CHERRY BOUNCE, NO. 2

One quart of rum to one quart of wild cherries, and three-quarters
pound of sugar. Put into a jug, and at first give it a frequent shake.
Let it stand for several months before you pour off and bottle. A
little water put on to the cherries left in the jug will make a
pleasant and less ardent drink.


                         CHERRY BOUNCE, NO. 3

One gallon of good whiskey, one and one-half pints of wild black
cherries bruised so as to break the stones, two ounces of common
almonds shelled, two ounces of white sugar, one-half teaspoonful
cinnamon, one-quarter teaspoonful cloves, one-quarter teaspoonful
nutmeg, all bruised. Let stand twelve to thirteen days, and draw off.
This, with the addition of one-half gallon of brandy, makes very nice
cherry bounce.


                          TO MAKE CHERRY WINE

Pull off the stalks of the cherries, and mash them without breaking the
stones; then press them hard through a hair bag, and to every gallon of
liquor, put two pounds of sugar. The vessel must be full, and let it
work as long as it makes a noise in the vessel; then stop it up close
for a month or more, and when it is fine, draw it into dry bottles, and
put a lump of sugar into every bottle. If it makes them fly, open them
all for a moment, and then stop them up again. It will be fit to drink
in a quarter of a year.


                          CHERRY WINE, NO. 2

Fifteen pounds of cherries, two pounds of currants. Bruise them
together. Mix with them two-thirds of the kernels, and put the whole
of the cherries, currants, and kernels into a barrel, with one-quarter
pound of sugar to every pint of juice. The barrel must be quite full.
Cover the barrel with vine leaves, and sand above them, and let it
stand until it has done working, which will be in about three weeks;
then stop it with a bung, and in two months’ time it may be bottled.

2. Gather the cherries when quite ripe. Pull them from their stalks,
and press them through a hair sieve. To every gallon of the liquor add
two pounds of lump sugar finely beaten; stir all together, and put it
into a vessel that will just hold it. When it has done fermenting, stop
it very close for three months, and then bottle it off for use.


                    GENERAL RULES FOR MAKING CIDER

Always choose perfectly ripe and sound fruit. Pick the apples by hand.
(An active boy with the bag slung over his shoulder will soon clear a
tree. Apples that have lain any time on the soil contract an earthy
taste, which will always be found in the cider.)

After sweating, and before being ground, wipe them dry, and if any
are found bruised or rotten, put them in a heap by themselves, for an
inferior cider to make vinegar.

Always use hair cloths, instead of straw, to place between the layers
of pomace. The straw when heated, gives a disagreeable taste to the
cider.

As the cider runs from the press, let it pass through a hair sieve into
a large open vessel that will hold as much juice as can be expressed in
one day. In a day, or sometimes less, the pomace will rise to the top,
and in a short time grow very thick. When little white bubbles break
through it, draw off the liquor by a spigot, placed about three inches
from the bottom, so that the lees may be left quietly behind.

The cider must be drawn off into very clean, sweet casks and closely
watched. The moment the white bubbles before mentioned are perceived
rising at the bung-hole, rack it again. When the fermentation is
completely at an end, fill up the cask with cider, in all respects like
that already contained in it, and bung it up tight, previous to which a
tumbler of sweet oil may be poured into the bung-hole.

After being made and barrelled it should be allowed to ferment until
it acquires the desired flavor, for perfectly sweet cider is not
desirable. In the meantime clean barrels for its reception should be
prepared thus: Some clean strips of rag are dipped into melted sulphur,
lighted and hung in the bung-hole, and the bung laid loosely on the
end of the rag. This is to allow the sulphur vapor to well fill the
barrel. Tie up a half-pint of mustard-seed in a coarse muslin rag and
put it into the barrel, then put your cider in. Now add the isinglass,
which “fines” the cider but does not help to keep it sweet. This is the
old-fashioned way, and will keep cider in the same condition as it
went into the barrel, if kept in a cool place, for a year. The sulphur
vapor checks the fermentation, and the sulphur in the mustard-seed
keeps it checked. We hear that professional cider dealers are now using
the bisulphite of lime instead of the mustard-seed and the sulphur
vapor. This bisulphite of lime is the same as the “preserving powder.”
It is only another form of using the sulphur, but it is more convenient
and perhaps more effectual. Another method is to add sugar, one and a
half pounds sugar to a gallon of the cider, and let it ferment. This
makes a fermented, clear, good cider, but sweet. It lasts sweet about
six months, if kept in a cool situation.

Preparatory to bottling cider it should be examined, to see whether it
be clear and sparkling. If not, it should be clarified in a similar
way to beer, and left for a fortnight. The night before it is intended
to put it into bottles, the bung should be taken out of the cask, and
left so until the next day, when it may be bottled, but not corked down
until the day after, as, if this be done at once, many of the bottles
will burst by keeping. The best corks and champagne bottles should be
used, and it is usual to wire and cover the corks with tinfoil, after
the manner of champagne. A few bottles may be kept in a warm place
to ripen, or a small piece of lump sugar may be put into each bottle
before corking, if the cider be wanted for immediate use, or for
consumption during the cooler portion of the year, but for warm weather
and for long keeping this is inadmissible. The bottled stock should be
stored in a cool cellar, when the quality will be greatly improved by
age.


                             TO CAN CIDER

Cider, if taken when first made, brought to the boiling heat, and
canned, precisely as fruit is canned, will keep from year to year
without any change of taste. Canned up this way in the fall, it may be
kept a half-dozen years or longer, as good as when first made. It is
better that the cider be settled and poured off from the dregs, and
when brought to boiling heat, the scum that gathers on the surface
taken off; but the only precaution necessary to preservation of the
cider is the sealing of it air tight when boiling hot. The juice of
other fruit can, no doubt, be preserved in the same way. To all tastes
not already corrupted by strong drinks, these unfermented juices are
very delicious. The juice of the grape is better than wine a century
old, and more healthy. Churches believing in literal eating and
drinking at the Lord’s supper could in this way avoid the poisonous
fermented spirits and drink the pure unfermented juice of the grape, as
was doubtless done by the primitive Christians.


                             BOILING CIDER

To prepare cider for boiling, the first process is to filter it
immediately on coming from the press. This is easiest done by placing
some sticks crosswise in the bottom of a barrel,—a flour barrel with
a single head is the best,—wherein an inch hole has been bored, and
covering these sticks with say four inches of clean rye or wheat straw,
and then filling the barrel to within a foot of the top with clean sand
or coal dust,—sand is the best. Pour the cider as it comes from the
press into the top of this barrel, drawing it off as soon as it comes
out at the bottom into air-tight casks, and let it stand in the cellar
until March. Then draw it out with as little exposure to the air as
possible, put it into bottles that can be tightly and securely corked,
and in two months it will be fit for use.


                            TO CLEAR CIDER

To clear and improve cider generally take two quarts of ground
horseradish and one pound of thick gray filtering paper to the barrel,
and either shake or stir until the paper has separated into small
shreds, and let it stand for twenty-four hours, when the cider may be
drawn off by means of a siphon or a stop cock. Instead of paper, a
preparation of wool may be taken, which is to be had in the market, and
which is preferable to paper, as it has simply to be washed with water,
when it may be used again.


                   CIDER, TO PRESERVE AND KEEP SWEET

1. To one barrel of cider, put in one pound of mustard-seed, two pounds
of raisins, one-quarter pound of the sticks (bark) of cinnamon. 2.
When the cider in the barrel is in a lively fermentation, add as much
white sugar as will be equal to one-quarter or three-quarters of a
pound to each gallon of cider (according as the apples are sweet or
sour); let the fermentation proceed until the liquid has the taste
to suit, then add one-quarter of an ounce of sulphite (not sulphate)
of lime to each gallon of cider, shake well, and let it stand three
days, and bottle for use. The sulphite should first be dissolved in a
quart or so of cider before introducing it into the barrel of cider.
3. When fermentation commences in one barrel, draw off the liquor into
another one, straining through a flannel cloth. Put into the cider
three-quarters of an ounce of the oil of sassafras, and the same of
the oil of wintergreen, well shaken up in a pint of alcohol. But one
difficulty is said to pertain to this preparation of cider. It is so
palatable that people won’t keep it long.


                            CIDER CHAMPAGNE

Five gallons good cider, one quart spirit, one and one-quarter pounds
honey or sugar. Mix, and let them rest for a fortnight, then fine with
one gill of skimmed milk. This, put up in champagne bottles, silvered,
and labelled, has often been sold for champagne. It opens very
sparkling.


                             CHERRY CIDER

Seven gallons of apple cider, two quarts of dried black cherries, one
pint of dried blueberries, one-half pint of elderberries, eighteen
pounds of brown sugar.


                           DEVONSHIRE CIDER

The apples, after being plucked, are left in heaps in the orchard for
some time, to complete their ripening, and render them more saccharine.
They are then crushed between grooved cylinders, surmounted by a
hopper, or in a circular trough, by two vertical edge-wheels of wood
moved by a horse; after passing through which, they are received into
large tubs or crocks, and are then called pomace. They are afterwards
laid on the vat in alternate layers of the pomace and clean straw,
called reeds. They are then pressed, a little water being occasionally
added. The juice passes through a hair sieve, or similar strainer, and
is received in a large vessel, whence it is run into casks or open
vats, where everything held in mechanical suspension is deposited. The
fermentation is often slow of being developed; though the juice be
set in November or December, the working sometimes hardly commences
till March. Till this time the cider is sweet; it now becomes pungent
and vinous, and is ready to be racked for use. If the fermentation
continue, it is usual to rack it again into a clean cask that has been
well sulphured out, and to leave behind the head and sediment; or two
or three cans of cider are put into a clean cask, and a match of
brimstone burned in it. It is then agitated, by which the fermentation
of that quantity is completely stopped. The cask is then nearly filled,
the fermentation of the whole is checked, the process of racking is
repeated until it becomes so, and is continued from time to time till
the cider is in a quiet state and fit for drinking.


                             FRENCH CIDER

After the fruit is mashed in a mill, between iron cylinders, it is
allowed to remain in a large tun or tub for fourteen or fifteen hours,
before pressing. The juice is placed in casks, which are kept quite
full, and so placed under gawntrees, or stillions, that small tubs may
be put under them, to receive the matter that works over. At the end
of three or four days for sweet cider, and nine or ten days for strong
cider, it is racked into sulphured casks, and then stored in a cool
place.


                             WESTERN CIDER

To one pound of sugar, add one-half ounce of tartaric acid, two
tablespoonfuls of good yeast. Dissolve the sugar in one quart of warm
water; put all in a gallon jug, shake it well, fill the jug with pure
cold water, let it stand uncorked twelve hours, and it is fit for use.


                         CIDER WITHOUT APPLES

To each gallon of cold water, put one pound common sugar, one-half
ounce tartaric acid, one tablespoonful of yeast. Shake well, make in
the evening, and it will be fit for use next day. Make in a keg a few
gallons at a time, leaving a few quarts to make into next time, not
using yeast again until keg needs rinsing. If it gets a little sour,
make a little more into it, or put as much water with it as there is
cider, and put it with the vinegar. If it is desired to bottle this
cider by manufacturers of small drinks, you will proceed as follows:
five gallons hot water, thirty pounds brown sugar, three-quarters pound
tartaric acid, twenty-five gallons cold water, three pints of hops or
brewers’ yeast worked into paste with three-quarters pound flour, and
one pint water will be required in making this paste. Put all together
in a barrel, which it will fill, and let it work twenty-four hours,
the yeast running out at a bung all the time, by putting in a little
occasionally to keep it full. Then bottle, putting in two or three
broken raisins to each bottle, and it will nearly equal champagne.


                              CIDER WINE

Let the new cider from sour apples (ripe, sound fruit preferred)
ferment from one to three weeks, as the weather is warm or cool. When
it has attained to a lively fermentation, add to each gallon, according
to its acidity, from one-half pound to two pounds of white crushed
sugar, and let the whole ferment until it possesses precisely the taste
which it is desired should be permanent. In this condition pour out one
quart of the cider, and add for each gallon of cider one-quarter ounce
of sulphite of lime, not sulphate. Stir the powder and cider until
intimately mixed, and return the emulsion to the fermenting liquid.
Agitate briskly and thoroughly for a few moments, and then let the
cider settle. Fermentation will cease at once. When, after a few days,
the cider has become clear, draw off carefully, to avoid the sediment,
and bottle. If loosely corked, which is better, it will become a
sparkling cider wine, and may be kept indefinitely long.


                          TO MAKE CLARY WINE

Take twelve pounds of Malaga raisins, pick them and chop them very
small, put them in a tub, and to each pound one-half pint of water. Let
them steep ten or eleven days, stirring it twice every day; you must
keep it covered close all the while. Then strain it off, and put it
into a vessel, and about one-quarter peck of the tops of clary, when
it is in blossom; stop it close for six weeks, and then bottle it off.
In two or three months it is fit to drink. It is apt to have a great
sediment at bottom; therefore it is best to draw it off by plugs, or
tap it pretty high.


                        TO MAKE FINE CLARY WINE

To five gallons of water put twelve and one-half pounds of sugar, and
the whites of six eggs well beaten. Set it over the fire, and let it
boil gently near an hour; skim it clean and put it in a tub, and when
it is near cold, then put into the vessel you keep it in about half a
strike of clary in the blossom, stripped from the stalks, flowers and
little leaves together, and one pint of new ale-yeast. Then put in the
liquor, and stir it two or three times a day for three days; when it
has done working, stop it up, and bottle it at three or four months
old, if it is clear.


                              CLOVER WINE

Three quarts blossoms, four quarts boiling water; let stand three days.
Drain, and to the flower heads add three more quarts of water and the
peel of one lemon. Boil fifteen minutes, drain, and add to other juice.
To every quart, add one pound of sugar; ferment with one cup of yeast.
Keep in warm room three weeks, then bottle.


                           TO MAKE COCK ALE

Take five gallons of ale, and a large cock, the older the better.
Parboil the cock, flay him, and stamp him in a stone mortar till his
bones are broken (you must craw and gut him when you flay him), then
put the cock into one quart of sack, and put to it one and one-half
pounds of raisins of the sun stoned, some blades of mace, and a few
cloves. Put all these into a canvas bag, and a little before you find
the ale has done working, put the ale and bag together into a vessel.
In a week or nine days’ time bottle it up; fill the bottle but just
above the neck, and give it the same time to ripen as other ale.


                         TO MAKE COWSLIP WINE

To three gallons of water put seven pounds of sugar; stir it well
together, and beat the whites of ten eggs very well, and mix with the
liquor, and make it boil as fast as possible. Skim it well, and let it
continue boiling two hours; then strain it through a hair sieve, and
set it a cooling, and when it is cold as wort should be, put a small
quantity of yeast to it on a toast, or in a dish. Let it stand all
night working; then bruise one-half peck of cowslips, put them into
your vessel, and your liquor upon them, adding three ounces of syrup
of lemons. Cut a turf of grass and lay on the bung; let it stand a
fortnight, and then bottle it. Put your tap into your vessel before you
put your wine in, that you may not shake it.


                     COWSLIP OR CLARY WINE, NO. 2

The best method of making these wines is to put in the pips dry, when
the fermentation of the wine has subsided. This method is preferred for
two reasons: first, it may be performed at any time of the year when
lemons are cheapest, and when other wine is making; second, all waste
of the pips is avoided. Being light, they are sure to work over if put
in the cask while the wine is in a state of fermentation. Boil fourteen
pounds of good moist sugar with five gallons of water, and one ounce
of hops. Shave thin the rinds of eight lemons or Seville oranges, or
part of each; they must be put in the boil the last quarter of an hour,
or the boiling liquor poured over them. Squeeze the juice to be added
when cool, and rinse the pulp in the hot liquor, and keep it filled
up, either with wine or new beer, as long as it works over; then paste
brown paper, and leave it for four, six, or eight months. The quantity
of flowers is one quart of flowers to each gallon of wine. Let them
be gathered on a fine, dry day, and carefully picked from every bit
of stalk and green. Spread them thinly on trays, sheets, or papers,
and turn them often. When thoroughly dry put them in paper bags, until
the wine is ready to receive them. Put them in at the bung-hole; stir
them down two or three times a day, till all the cowslips have sunk;
at the same time add isinglass. Then paste over again with paper. In
six months the wine will be fit to bottle, but will be improved by
keeping longer in the cask. The pips shrink into a very small compass
in drying; the quantity allowed is of fresh-gathered flowers. Observe,
also, that wine well boiled, and refined with hops and isinglass, is
just as good used from the cask as if bottled, which is a great saving
of time and hazard. Wine made on the above principles has been often
praised by connoisseurs, and supposed to have been bottled half a day.


                             CURRANT SHRUB

Take white currants when quite ripe, pick them off the stalks, and
bruise them. Strain out the juice through a cloth, and to two quarts of
the juice put two pounds of loaf sugar; when it is dissolved, add one
gallon of rum, then strain through a flannel bag that will keep in the
jelly, and it will run off clear. Then bottle for use.


                             CURRANT WINE

Take four gallons of currants, not too ripe, and strip them into an
earthen stein that has a cover to it. Then take two and one-half
gallons of water and five and one-half pounds of double refined sugar;
boil the sugar and water together, skim it, and pour it boiling hot
on the currants, letting it stand forty-eight hours; then strain it
through a flannel bag into the stein again, let it stand a fortnight to
settle, and bottle it out.


                          CURRANT WINE, NO. 2

The currants should be fully ripe when picked. Put them into a large
tub, in which they should remain a day or two, then crush with the
hands, unless you have a small patent wine-press, in which they should
not be pressed too much, or the stems will be bruised, and impart a
disagreeable taste to the juice. If the hands are used, put the crushed
fruit, after the juice has been poured off, in a cloth or sack and
press out the remaining juice. Put the juice back into the tub after
cleansing it, where it should remain about three days, until the first
stages of fermentation are over, and remove once or twice a day the
scum copiously arising to the top. Then put the juice in a vessel—a
demijohn, keg, or barrel,—of a size to suit the quantity made, and to
each quart of juice add three pounds of the best yellow sugar, and
soft water sufficient to make a gallon. Thus, ten quarts of juice and
thirty pounds of sugar will give you ten gallons of wine, and so on in
proportion. Those who do not like sweet wine can reduce the quantity of
sugar to two and one-half, or who wish it very sweet, raise to three
and one-half pounds per gallon. The vessel must be full, and the bung
or stopper left off until fermentation ceases, which will be in twelve
or fifteen days. Meanwhile, the cask must be filled up daily with
currant juice left over, as fermentation throws out the impure matter.
When fermentation ceases, rack the wine off carefully, either from the
spigot or by a siphon, and keep running all the time. Cleanse the cask
thoroughly with boiling water, then return the wine, bung up tightly,
and let it stand four or five months, when it will be fit to drip, and
can be bottled if desired. All the vessels, casks, etc., should be
perfectly sweet, and the whole operation should be done with an eye to
cleanliness. In such event, every drop of brandy or other spirituous
liquors added will detract from the flavor of the wine, and will not in
the least degree increase its keeping qualities. Currant wine made in
this way will keep for an age.


                          CURRANT WINE, NO. 3

To every pailful of currants, on the stem, put one pailful of water;
mash and strain. To each gallon of the mixture of juice and water add
three and one-quarter pounds of sugar. Mix well and put into your cask,
which should be placed in the cellar, on the tilt, that it may be
racked off in October, without stirring up the sediment. Two bushels of
currants will make one barrel of wine. Four gallons of the mixture of
juice and water will, after thirteen pounds of sugar are added, make
five gallons of wine. The barrel should be filled within three inches
of the bung, which must be made air tight by placing wet clay over it
after it is driven in.

2. Pick your currants when ripe on a fair day, crush them well, and
to every gallon of juice add two gallons of water and three pounds of
sugar; if you wish it sweeter, add another one-half pound of sugar.
Mix all together in some large vessel, then dip out into earthen jars.
Let it stand to ferment in some cool place, skimming it every other
morning. In about ten days it will be ready to strain off; bottle and
seal, or put in a cask and cork tight. The longer you keep it the
better it will be.


                          CURRANT WINE, NO. 4

Into a five gallon keg put five quarts of currant juice, fifteen pounds
of sugar, and fill up with water. Let it stand in a cool place until
sufficiently worked, and then bung up tight. You can let it remain in
the cask, and draw out as you want to use it.


              CURRANT OR GOOSEBERRY WINE, WITHOUT BOILING

Take ten quarts of fruit, bruise it, and add to it five quarts of
water. Stir it well together, and let it stand twelve hours; then
strain it through a coarse canvas bag or hair sieve, add eleven pounds
of good Lisbon sugar, and stir it well. Put the pulp of the fruit into
a gallon more water; stir it about and let it stand twelve hours. Then
strain to the above, again stirring it; cover the tub with a sack. In
a day or two the wine will begin to ferment. When the whole surface is
covered with a thick, yeasty froth, begin to skim it on to a sieve.
What runs through may be returned to the wine. Do this from time to
time for several days, till no more yeast forms. Then put it into the
cask.


                       IMITATION OF CYPRESS WINE

To five gallons of water put five quarts of the juice of white
elderberries, pressed gently through a sieve without bruising the
seeds. Add to every gallon of liquor one and one-half pounds of sugar,
and to the whole quantity one ounce of sliced ginger, and one-half
ounce of cloves. Boil this nearly an hour, taking off the scum as it
rises, and pour in an open tub to cool. Work it with ale yeast spread
upon a toast of bread for three days. Then turn it into a vessel that
will just hold it, adding about three-quarters pound bruised raisins,
to lie in the liquor till drawn off, which should not be done till the
wine is fine.


                              DAISY WINE

One quart of daisy heads, one quart of cold water. Let stand
forty-eight hours. Strain and add three-quarters pound of sugar to
each quart of liquid. Let stand about two weeks, or till it stops
fermenting. Strain again and bottle. It improves with keeping.


                            DANDELION WINE

Four quarts of dandelions. Cover with four quarts of boiling water; let
stand three days. Add peel of three oranges and one lemon. Boil fifteen
minutes; drain and add juice of oranges and lemon to four pounds of
sugar and one cup of yeast. Keep in warm room and strain again; let
stand for three weeks. It is then ready to bottle and serve.


                              DAMSON WINE

Gather the fruit dry, weigh, and bruise it, and to every eight pounds
of fruit add one gallon of water; boil the water, pour it on the fruit
scalding hot. Let it stand for two days; then draw it off, put it into
a clean cask, and to every gallon of liquor add two and one-half pounds
of good sugar. Fill the cask. It may be bottled off after standing in
the cask a year. On bottling the wine, put a small lump of loaf sugar
into every bottle.


                     DAMSON, OR BLACK CHERRY WINE

Damson, or Black Cherry Wine may be made in the same manner, excepting
the addition of spice, and that the sugar should be finer. If kept in
an open vessel four days, these wines will ferment of themselves; but
it is better to forward the process by the use of a little yeast, as
in former recipes. They will be fit for use in about eight months.
As there is a flatness belonging to both these wines if bottled, a
teaspoonful of rice, a lump or two of sugar, or four or five raisins
will tend to enliven it.


                                EBULUM

To one hogshead of strong ale take a heaped bushel of elderberries, and
one-half pound of juniper-berries beaten. Put in all the berries when
you put in the hops, and let them boil together till the berries break
in pieces, then work it up as you do ale. When it has done working add
to it one-half pound of ginger, one-half ounce of cloves, one-half
ounce of mace, one ounce of nutmegs, one ounce of cinnamon, grossly
beaten, one-half pound of citron, one-half pound of eringo root, and
likewise of candied orange-peel. Let the sweetmeats be cut in pieces
very thin, and put with the spice into a bag, and hang it in the vessel
when you stop it up. So let it stand till it is fine, then bottle it
up, and drink it with lumps of double refined sugar in the glass.


                           ELDER-FLOWER WINE

Take the flowers of elder, and be careful that you don’t let any stalks
in; to every quart of flowers put one gallon of water, and three pounds
of loaf sugar. Boil the water and sugar a quarter of an hour, then pour
it on the flowers and let it work three days; then strain the wine
through a hair sieve, and put it into a cask. To every ten gallons of
wine add one ounce of isinglass dissolved in cider, and six whole eggs.
Close it up and let it stand six months, and then bottle it.


                          TO MAKE ELDER WINE

Take five pounds of Malaga raisins, rub them and shred them small; then
take one gallon of water, boil it an hour, and let it stand till it
is but blood-warm; then put it in an earthen crock or tub, with your
raisins. Let them steep ten days, stirring them once or twice a day;
then pass the liquor through a hair sieve, and have in readiness one
pint of the juice of elderberries drawn off as you do for jelly of
currants; then mix it cold with the liquor, stir it well together, put
it into a vessel, and let it stand in a warm place. When it has done
working, stop it close. Bottle it about Candlemas.


                            ELDERBERRY WINE

Nine quarts elderberry juice, nine quarts water, eleven and one-half
pounds white sugar, two ounces red tartar. These are put into a cask,
a little yeast added, and the whole is fermented. When undergoing
fermentation, one ounce ginger root, one ounce allspice, one-quarter
ounce cloves are put into a bag of clean cotton cloth, and suspended
in the cask. They will give a pleasant flavor to the wine, which will
become clear in about two months, and may be drawn off and bottled.
Add some brandy to this wine, but if the fermentation is properly
conducted, this is not necessary.


                           ELDER WINE, NO. 2

Take spring-water, and let it boil half an hour; then measure two and
one-half gallons, and let it stand to cool. Then have in readiness
ten pounds of raisins of the sun well picked and rubbed in a cloth,
and hack them so as to cut them, but not too small; then put them in,
the water being cold, and let them stand nine days, stirring them two
or three times a day. Then have ready three pints of the juice of
elderberries full ripe, which must be infused in boiling water, or
baked three hours; then strain out the raisins, and when the elder
liquor is cold, mix that with it, but it is best to boil up the juice
to a syrup, one-half pound of sugar to every pint of juice. Boil and
skim it, and when cold mix it with your raisin liquor, and two or three
spoonfuls of good ale yeast. Stir it well together; then put it into a
vessel fit for it, let it stand in a warm place to work, and in your
cellar five or six months.


                           ELDER WINE, NO. 3

The quantity of fruit required is one gallon of ripe elderberries,
and one quart of damsons or sloes, for every two gallons of wine to
be produced. Boil them in water till the damsons burst, frequently
breaking them with a flat stick; then strain and return the liquor
to the copper. The quantity of liquor required for nine gallons
of wine will be ten gallons; therefore if the first liquor proves
short of this, add water to the pulp, rub it about and strain to the
rest. Boil two hours with twenty-three pounds of coarse moist sugar;
three-quarters of a pound of ginger bruised, one-half a pound of
allspice, and one ounce of cinnamon, loosely tied in a muslin bag, and
two or three ounces of hops. When quite cool work on the foregoing
plan, tun in two days, drop in the spice, and suspend the bag by a
string not long enough to let it touch the bottom of the cask; fill it
up for a fortnight, then paste over stiff brown paper. It will be fit
to tap in two months; will keep for years, but does not improve by age
like many other wines. It is never better than in the first year of its
age.


                    ELDER WINE (FLAVORED WITH HOPS)

The berries, which must be thoroughly ripe, are to be stripped from the
stalk, and squeezed to a pulp. Stir and squeeze this pulp every day for
four days; then separate the juice from the pulp by passing through a
cane sieve or basket. To every gallon of juice, add one-half gallon of
cold water. Boil four and one-half gallons with three ounces of hops
for one-half hour; then strain it and boil again, with one and one-half
pounds of sugar to the gallon, for about ten minutes, skimming all
the time; pour it into a cooler, and, while luke-warm, put a piece of
bread with a little balm on it to set it working. Put it into a cask as
soon as cold; when it has done working, cork it down, and leave it six
months before it is tapped. It is then drinkable, but improves with age
exceedingly.


                    TO MAKE ELDER WINE AT CHRISTMAS

Take five pounds of Malaga or Lipara raisins, rub them clean, and shred
them small. Then take five quarts of water, boil it an hour, and when
it is near cold put it in a tub with the raisins; let them steep ten
days, and stir them once or twice a day. Then strain it through a hair
sieve, and by infusion draw one pint of elder-juice, and one-quarter
of a pint of damson juice. Make the juice into a thin syrup, a pound
of sugar to a pint of juice, and not boil it much, but just enough to
keep. When you have strained out the raisin liquor, put that and the
syrup into a vessel fit for it, and one-half a pound of sugar. Stop the
bung with a cork till it gathers to a head, then open it, and let it
stand till it has done working; then put the cork in again, and stop
it very close, and let it stand in a warm place two or three months,
and then bottle it. Make the elder and damson juice into syrup in its
season, and keep it in a cool cellar till you have convenience to make
the wine.


                      TO MAKE ELDER-FLOWER WATER

Take two large handfuls of dried elder-flowers, and ten gallons of
spring-water; boil the water, and pour it scalding hot upon the
flowers. The next day put to every gallon of water five pounds of
Malaga raisins, the stalks being first picked off, but not washed; chop
them grossly with a chopping-knife, then put them into your boiled
water, and stir the water, raisins, and flowers well together, and so
do twice a day for twelve days. Then press out the juice clear, as long
as you can get any liquor out. Then put it in your barrel fit for it,
and stop it up two or three days till it works, and in a few days stop
it up close, and let it stand two or three months, till it is clear;
then bottle it.


                           ENGLISH FIG WINE

Take the large blue figs when pretty ripe, and steep them in white
wine, having made some slits in them, that they may swell and gather
in the substance of the wine. Then slice some other figs and let them
simmer over a fire in water until they are reduced to a kind of pulp.
Then strain out the water, pressing the pulp hard and pour it as hot as
possible on the figs that are imbrued in the wine. Let the quantities
be nearly equal, but the water somewhat more than the wine and figs.
Let them stand twenty-four hours, mash them well together, and draw
off what will run without squeezing. Then press the rest, and if not
sweet enough add a sufficient quantity of sugar to make it so. Let it
ferment, and add to it a little honey and sugar candy, then fine it
with white of eggs, and a little isinglass, and draw it off for use.


                        TO MAKE FRONTIGNAC WINE

Take three gallons of water, six pounds of white sugar, and three
pounds of raisins of the sun cut small; boil these together an hour.
Then take of the flowers of elder, when they are falling, and will
shake off, the quantity of half a peck; put them in the liquor when it
is almost cold. The next day put in three spoonfuls of syrup of lemons
and two spoonfuls of ale-yeast, and two days after put it in a vessel
that is fit for it, and when it has stood two months, bottle it off.


                              GINGER BEER

The proportions of this may vary. Loaf sugar is preferable to moist;
some say a pound to a gallon, others a pound and a half. Some allow
but half an ounce of ginger (sliced or bruised) to a gallon, others
an ounce. A lemon to a gallon is the usual proportion, to which some
add a quarter of an ounce or half an ounce of cream of tartar. The
white of an egg to each gallon is useful for clarifying, but not
absolutely necessary. Some people put a quarter of a pint of brandy
to four gallons of beer by way of keeping it; half an ounce of hops
boiled in it would answer the same purpose. Boil the sugar, and shaved
rind of lemons; let it boil half an hour. Clear the lemons of the
white pith and put them in the wine. When cool, stir in the yeast (two
tablespoonfuls to a gallon), put it in the barrel without straining,
and bung close. In a fortnight draw off and bottle. It will be ready
for use in another fortnight, and will keep longer than ginger pop. If
cream of tartar is used, pour the boiling liquor over it, but do not
boil it.


                          GINGER BEER, NO. 2

Seven pounds crushed white sugar, eight gallons water, one-half cup
of yeast, four ounces best powdered ginger, a few drops of essence
of lemon, one-half teaspoonful essence of cloves. To the ginger pour
one pint of boiling water and let it stand fifteen or twenty minutes.
Dissolve the sugar in two quarts of warm water, pour both into a barrel
half-filled with cold water, then add the essence and the yeast; let it
stand one-half hour, then fill up with cold water. Let it ferment six
to twelve hours and bottle.


                              GINGER WINE

Take four gallons of water, ten pounds of loaf sugar, one and
one-quarter pounds of bruised ginger, one ounce of hops, the shaved
rinds of five lemons or Seville oranges. Let these boil together for
two hours, carefully skimming. Pour it, without straining, on to
two pounds of raisins. When cool, put in the juice of the lemons or
oranges; rinse the pulp in a pint or two of the wine, and strain it
to the rest. Ferment it with yeast; mix one-half cup of solid yeast
with a pint or two of the wine, and with that work the rest. Next day
tun it, raisins, hops, ginger, and all together, and fill it up for
a fortnight either with wine or with good new beer; then dissolve one
ounce of isinglass in a little of the wine, and return it to the rest
to fine it. A few days afterward bung it close.

This wine will be in full perfection in six months. It may be bottled,
but is apt to fly; and if made exactly by the above directions, and
drawn from the cask, it will sparkle like champagne.


                        TO MAKE GOOSEBERRY WINE

Boil four gallons of water, and one-half pound of sugar an hour, skim
it well, and let it stand till it is cold. Then to every quart of that
water, allow one and one-half pounds of gooseberries, first beaten or
bruised very well; let it stand twenty-four hours. Then strain it out,
and to every gallon of this liquor put three pounds of sugar; let it
stand in the vat twelve hours. Then take the thick scum off, and put
the clear into a vessel fit for it, and let it stand a month; then draw
it off, and rinse the vessel with some of the liquor. Put it in again,
and let it stand four months, and bottle it.


                            GOOSEBERRY WINE

Take to every four pounds of gooseberries one and one-quarter pounds
of sugar, and one quart of fair water. Bruise the berries, and steep
them twenty-four hours in the water, stirring them often; then press
the liquor from them, and put your sugar to the liquor. Then put in a
vessel fit for it, and when it is done working stop it up, and let it
stand a month; then rack it off into another vessel, and let it stand
five or six weeks longer. Then bottle it out, putting a small lump of
sugar into every bottle; cork your bottles well, and three months’ end
it will be fit to drink. In the same manner is currant and raspberry
wine made; but cherry wine differs, for the cherries are not to be
bruised, but stoned, and put the sugar and water together, and give it
a boil and a skim, and then put in your fruit, letting it stew with a
gentle fire a quarter of an hour, and then let it run through a sieve
without pressing, and when it is cold put it in a vessel, and order it
as your gooseberry or currant wine. The only cherries for wine are the
great bearers, Murray cherries, Morelloes, Black Flanders, or the John
Treduskin cherries.


                        GOOSEBERRY WINE, NO. 2

Pick and bruise the gooseberries, and to every pound of berries put
one quart of cold spring water, and let it stand three days, stirring
it twice or thrice a day. Add to every gallon of juice three pounds
of loaf sugar. Fill the barrel, and when it is done working, add to
every ten quarts of liquor one pint of brandy and a little isinglass.
The gooseberries must be picked when they are just changing color. The
liquor ought to stand in the barrel six months. Taste it occasionally,
and bottle when the sweetness has gone off.


                      GOOSEBERRY AND CURRANT WINE

The following method of making superior gooseberry and currant wines is
recommended in a French work.

For currant wine four pounds of honey, dissolved in seven gallons of
boiling water, to which, when clarified, is added the juice of four
pounds of red or white currants. It is then fermented for twenty-four
hours and one pound of sugar to every one gallon of water is added. The
preparation is afterward clarified with whites of eggs and cream of
tartar.

For gooseberry wine, the fruit is gathered dry when about half-ripe,
and then pounded in a mortar. The juice when properly strained is mixed
with sugar in the proportion of three pounds to every two gallons
of juice. It is then left in a quiet state for fifteen days, at the
expiration of which it is carefully poured off and left to ferment for
three months, when the quantity is under fifteen gallons, and five
months when double that quantity. It is then bottled and soon becomes
fit for drinking.


                         PEARL GOOSEBERRY WINE

Take as many as you please of the best gooseberries, bruise them,
and let them stand all night. The next morning press or squeeze them
out and let the liquor stand to settle seven or eight hours; then
pour off the clear from the settling, and measure it as you put it
into your vessel, adding to every three pints of liquor one pound of
double refined sugar. Break your sugar into fine lumps, and put it in
the vessel with a bit of isinglass, stop it up, and at three months’
end bottle it out, putting into every bottle a lump of double refined
sugar. This is the fine gooseberry wine.


                          RED GOOSEBERRY WINE

Take five gallons cold soft water, five and one-half gallons red
gooseberries, and ferment. Now mix eight pounds raw sugar, one pound
beet root sliced, one-half ounce red tartar in fine powder. Afterward
put in one-half pound sassafras chips, one-half gallon brandy or less.
This will make nine gallons.


                     RED AND WHITE GOOSEBERRY WINE

Take one and one-half gallons cold soft water, three quarts red
gooseberries, two quarts white gooseberries. Ferment. Now mix two and
one-half pounds raw sugar, three-quarters pound honey, one-half ounce
tartar in fine powder. Afterwards put in one ounce bitter almonds, a
small handful sweet briar, two quarts brandy or less.


                  WHITE GOOSEBERRY OR CHAMPAGNE WINE

Take four and one-half gallons cold soft water and fifteen quarts of
white gooseberries. Ferment. Now mix six pounds refined sugar, four
pounds honey, one ounce white tartar in fine powder. Put in one ounce
dry orange and lemon peel, or two ounces fresh, and add one-half gallon
white brandy. This will make nine gallons.


                        UNFERMENTED GRAPE JUICE

Wash and take from the stems ten pounds ripe Concord grapes. Add two
quarts water and bring them to a boil. Use a potato masher. When the
seeds separate, strain through double cheese-cloth. Add two pounds of
granulated sugar and strain again. Bring again to a boil and bottle
directly, boiling hot, cork and seal, or put into patent bottles. Serve
with cracked ice in the glass or diluted with about one-third ice water.


                              GRAPE WINE

Two quarts of grape juice, two quarts of water, four pounds of sugar.
Extract the juice of the grape in any simple way; if only a few quarts
are desired, we do it with a strainer and a pair of squeezers; if a
large quantity is desired, put the grapes into a cheese-press made
particularly clean, putting on sufficient weight to extract the juice
of a full hoop of grapes, being careful that none but perfect grapes
are used, perfectly ripe and free from blemish. After the first
pressing, put a little water with the pulp and press a second time,
using the juice of the second pressing with the water to be mixed with
the clear grape juice. If only a few quarts are made, place the wine as
soon as mixed into bottles, filling them even full, and allow to stand
in a warm place until it ferments, which will take about thirty-six
hours usually; then remove all the scum, cool, and put into a dark,
cool place. If a few gallons are desired, place in a keg, but the keg
must be even full, and after fermentation has taken place and the scum
removed, draw off and bottle, and cork tight.


                           GRAPE WINE, NO. 2

The larger the proportion of juice and the less of water, the nearer
it will approach to the strength and richness of foreign wine. There
ought not to be less than one-third juice pure. Squeeze the grapes in a
hair sieve, bruising them with the hand rather than any heavier press,
as it is better not to crush the stones. Soak the pulp in water until
a sufficient quantity is obtained to fill up the cask. As loaf sugar
is to be used for this wine, and it is not easily dissolved in cold
liquid, the best plan is to pour over the sugar, three pounds in every
gallon required, as much boiling water as will dissolve it, and stir
till it is dissolved. When cold, put it in the cask with the juice,
fill up from water in which the pulp has been steeped. To each gallon
of wine, put one-half ounce of bitter almonds, not blanched, but cut
small.


The fermentation will not be very great. When it subsides, proceed with
brandy and papering.


                           GRAPE WINE, NO. 3

Crush the grapes and let them stand one week. Drain off the juice,
strain; add one quart of water and three pounds of sugar to each
gallon. Put in a barrel or cask with a thin piece of muslin tacked over
the bung-hole, and let stand until fermentation stops. Put in a cask
and seal securely, and let stand six months. Then bottle and seal and
keep in cool place.


                               HOP BEER

Turn five quarts of water on six ounces of hops; boil three hours.
Strain off the liquor; turn on four quarts more of water, and twelve
spoonfuls of ginger, and boil the hops three hours longer. Strain and
mix it with the other liquor, and stir in two quarts of molasses.
Brown, very dry, one-half pound of bread, and put in,—rusked bread
is best. Pound it fine, and brown it in a pot, like coffee. After
cooling to be about luke-warm, add one pint of new yeast that is free
from salt. Keep the beer covered, in a temperate situation, till
fermentation has ceased, which is known by the settling of the froth;
then turn it into a keg or bottles, and keep it in a cool place.


                          JUNIPER-BERRY WINE

Take four and one-half gallons of cold soft water, seven pounds Malaga
or Smyrna raisins, two and one-quarter quarts juniper-berries, one-half
ounce red tartar, one-half handful wormwood, one-half handful sweet
marjoram, one pint whiskey or more. Ferment for ten or twelve days.


                        KOUMISS, A TARTAR WINE

Take a quantity of fresh mare’s milk, add to it one-sixth part water,
pour the mixture into a wooden bowl. Use as a ferment one-eighth part
of skimmed milk; but at any future preparation, a small portion of old
koumiss will answer better. Cover the vessel with a thick cloth and set
in a moderately warm place for twenty-four hours, at the end of which
time the milk will have become sour, and a thick substance gathered
at the top. Now, with a churn-staff, beat it till the thick substance
above mentioned be blended intimately with the adjacent fluid. Leave
it to rest twenty-four hours more; after which pour it into a higher
and narrower vessel resembling a churn, where the agitation must be
repeated as before. In this state it is called koumiss. The taste
should be a pleasant mixture of sweet and sour. It should always be
well shaken before used.


                                KOUMISS

Heat four cups milk; cool; when luke-warm, add one-fourth yeast cake
dissolved in one-fourth cup luke-warm water, and two tablespoons
sugar. Pour into bottles with patent stoppers, fill two-thirds full,
cork tightly. Shake; let stand in kitchen six hours, then on ice for
twenty-four hours; serve ice cold.


                          TO MAKE LEMON WINE

Take six large lemons, pare off the rind, and squeeze out the juice;
steep the rind in the juice, and put to it one quart of brandy. Let
it stand in an earthen pot close stopped three days, then squeeze six
more, and mix with two quarts of water, and as much sugar as will
sweeten the whole. Boil the water, lemons, and sugar together, letting
it stand till it is cool; then add one quart of white wine, and the
other lemon and brandy, and mix them together, and run it through a
flannel bag into some vessel. Let it stand three months and bottle it
off; cork your bottles very well, and keep it cool. It will be fit to
drink in a month or six weeks.


                           LEMON WINE, NO. 2

Four pounds sugar, one pound raisins (bruised), two gallons water.
Boil, then add one gallon cider. Ferment, and add one quart of spirits,
three-quarters ounce white tartar, a few drops essence of lemon.
Observe to shake the essence, with a little of the spirit, until it
becomes milky, before adding it to the wine.


                             MADEIRA WINE

To five gallons prepared cider, add one-half ounce tartaric acid,
one-half pint spirits, one-half pound loaf sugar. Let it stand ten
days, draw it off carefully, fine it down, and again rack it into
another cask.


                     MALT WINE, OR ENGLISH SHERRY

Take twelve pounds of good moist sugar, two gallons of water. Boil them
together two hours, skimming carefully. When the scum is all removed,
and the liquor looks clear, add one-half ounce of hops, which should
boil one-quarter hour or twenty minutes. When the liquor is quite
cold, add to it five quarts of strong beer in the height of working;
cover up and let it work forty-eight hours; then skim and tun. If none
remains for filling up, use new beer for that purpose. This method may
be adopted with all boiled wines, and will be found to improve their
strength and promote their keeping. In a fortnight or three weeks, when
the head begins to sink, add two and one-half pounds raisins (free
from stalks), one ounce of sugar candy, one ounce of bitter almonds,
one-half cup of the best brandy; brown paper, as in former articles. It
may be bottled in one year; but if left three years in the wood, and
then bottled, it will be found equal in strength and flavor to foreign
wine.


                                 MEAD

The following is a good recipe for mead: On five pounds of honey pour
five quarts of boiling water; boil, and remove the scum as it rises;
add one-quarter ounce of best hops, and boil for ten minutes. Then pour
the liquor into a tub to cool; when all but cold, add a little yeast
spread upon a slice of toasted bread. Let it stand in a warm room. When
fermentation is finished, bung it down, leaving a peg-hole which can
afterwards be closed, and in less than a year it will be fit to bottle.


                           SMALL WHITE MEAD

Take three gallons of spring water, make it hot, and dissolve in it
three quarts of honey, and one pound of loaf sugar. Let it boil about
one-half hour, and skim it as long as any scum rises. Then pour it
out into a tub, and squeeze in the juice of four lemons, put in the
rinds but of two. Twenty cloves, two races of ginger, one top of sweet
briar, and one top of rosemary. Let it stand in a tub till it is but
blood-warm; then make a brown toast, and spread it with two or three
spoonfuls of ale yeast. Put it into a vessel fit for it, let it stand
four or five days, then bottle it out.


                          TO MAKE STRONG MEAD

Take of spring water what quantity you please, make it more than
blood-warm, and dissolve honey in it until it is strong enough to bear
an egg, the breadth of a shilling; then boil it gently, near an hour,
taking off the scum as it rises. Then put to nine or ten gallons seven
or eight large blades of mace, three nutmegs quartered, twenty cloves,
three or four sticks of cinnamon, two or three roots of ginger, and
one-quarter ounce of Jamaica pepper; put these spices into the kettle
to the honey and water, a whole lemon, with a sprig of sweet briar,
and a sprig of rosemary. Tie the briar and rosemary together, and when
they have boiled a little while, take them out and throw them away; but
let your liquor stand on the spice in a clear earthen pot till the next
day. Then strain it into a vessel that is fit for it, put the spice
in a bag, hang it in the vessel, stop it, and at three months draw it
into bottles. Be sure that it is fine when it is bottled. After it is
bottled six weeks it is fit to drink.


                    MEAD, METHEGLIN, OR HONEY WINE

Boil honey in water for an hour; the proportion is from three to four
pounds to each gallon. Half an ounce of hops will both refine and
preserve it, but is not commonly added. Skim carefully, draining the
skimmings through a hair sieve, and return what runs through. When of a
proper coolness, stir in yeast; one teacupful of solid yeast will serve
for nine gallons. Tun it, and let it work over, filling it up till the
fermentation subsides. Paste over brown paper and watch it. Rich mead
will keep seven years, and afford a brisk, nourishing, and pleasant
drink. Some people like to add the thinly shaved rind of a lemon to
each gallon while boiling, and put the fruit, free from pith, into the
tub. Others flavor it with spices and sweet herbs, and mix it with new
beer or sweet wort; it is then called Welsh Braggart.


                               METHEGLIN

Mix one and one-half barrels of water with as much honey as will cause
an egg to rise a little above the water; then boil the mixture to one
barrel, skimming off the surface. It will be a fine red or wine color,
and clear. Then remove from the fire, and when cold, put it into a
barrel, leaving the bung-hole open for several days, until fermentation
be over; then stop it close and put into a cold cellar.


                             MOLASSES BEER

One ounce hops, one gallon water. Boil for ten minutes, strain, add one
pound molasses, and when luke-warm, add one spoonful yeast. Ferment.


                             MORELLO WINE

Take the juice of Morello or tame cherries, and to each quart of the
juice, put three quarts of water, and four pounds of coarse brown
sugar. Let them ferment, and skim until worked clear. Then draw off,
avoiding the sediment at the bottom. Bung up or bottle, which is best
for all wines, letting the bottles lie always on the side, either for
wines or beers.


                      TO MAKE MORELLO CHERRY WINE

Let your cherries be very ripe, pick off the stalks, and bruise your
fruit without breaking the stones. Put them in an open vessel together;
let them stand twenty-four hours, then press them, and to every gallon
put two pounds of fine sugar; then put it up in your cask, and when it
has done working, stop it close. Let it stand three or four months and
bottle it; it will be fit to drink in two months.


                             MOUNTAIN WINE

Pick out the big stalks of your Malaga raisins; then chop them very
small, five pounds to every gallon of cold spring water. Let them steep
a fortnight or more, squeeze out the liquor, and barrel it in a vessel
fit for it. First fume the vessel with brimstone; don’t stop it up till
the hissing is over.


                             MULBERRY WINE

On a dry day gather mulberries, when they are just changing from
redness to a shining black; spread them thinly on a fine cloth, or on
a floor or table for twenty-four hours, and then press them. Boil a
gallon of water with each gallon of juice, putting to every gallon of
water one ounce of cinnamon bark and six ounces of sugar candy finely
powdered. Skim and strain the water when it is taken off and settled,
and put in the mulberry juice. Now add to every gallon of the mixture
one pint of white or Rhenish wine. Let the whole stand in a cask to
ferment for five or six days. When settled drain it off into bottles
and keep cool.


                                 NOYAN

Take six ounces of peach kernels, and one ounce of bitter almonds.
Break them slightly. Put them into a jug with three pints of white
French brandy. Let them infuse three weeks, shaking the jug every
day. Then drain the liquor from kernels, and strain it through a line
bag. Melt three-quarters of a pound of best loaf sugar in one pint of
rose-water; mix it with the liquor, and filter it through a sieve, the
bottom of which is to be covered on the inside with blotting paper. Let
the vessel which is placed underneath to receive the liquor be entirely
white, that you may be better enabled to judge of its clearness. If it
is not clear the first time, repeat the filtering. Then bottle for use.


                          TO MAKE ORANGE WINE

Put twelve pounds of fine sugar and the whites of eight eggs well
beaten into six gallons of spring water; let it boil an hour, skimming
it all the time. Take it off and when it is pretty cool, put in the
juice and rind of fifty Seville oranges, and six spoonfuls of good ale
yeast, and let it stand two days. Then put it into your vessel, with
two quarts of Rhenish wine, and the juice of twelve lemons. You must
let the juice of lemons and wine and two pounds of double refined sugar
stand close covered ten or twelve hours before you put it in the vessel
to your orange wine, and skim off the seeds before you put it in. The
lemon peels must be put in with the oranges; half the rinds must be put
into the vessel. It must stand ten or twelve days before it is fit to
bottle.


                     ORANGE, OR LEMON WINE, BOILED

Take five gallons of water, fourteen pounds of loaf sugar, three
eggs, the whites and shells, one ounce of hops. Boil together the
sugar, water, and eggs; when it has boiled an hour, and become quite
clear, add the hops and the thinly shaved rinds of six or eight of the
fruit,—more or less, according as the bitter flavor is desired. Let it
boil in all two hours; meanwhile remove all the peel and white pith
of the fruit, and squeeze the juice. Pour a gallon or two of the hot
liquor on the pulp; stir it well about, and when cool strain to the
rest, and add the juice. Some people strain off the hops, rind, and
eggs; others prefer their remaining. It is by no means important which
mode is adopted. Work it with yeast, as the foregoing article, and
refine with isinglass dissolved in a quart of brandy. This wine should
be one year in wood and one in bottles, when it will be found excellent.


                 ORANGE OR LEMON WINE WITHOUT BOILING

Take one-half chest of Seville oranges; they are most juicy in March.
Shave the rinds of one or two dozen (more or less, according as the
bitter flavor is desired, or otherwise). Pour over this one or two
quarts of boiling water; cover up, and let it stand twelve hours; then
strain to the rest. Put into the cask fifty-six pounds of good Lisbon
sugar. Clear off all the peel and white pith from the oranges, and
squeeze through a hair sieve. Put the juice into the cask to the sugar.
Wash the sieve and pulp with cold water, and let the pulp soak in the
water twenty-four hours. Strain, and add to the last, continually
stirring it; add more water to the pulp, let it soak, then strain and
add. Continue to do so till the cask is full, often stirring it with a
stick until all the sugar is dissolved. Then leave it to ferment. The
fermentation will not be nearly so great as that of currant wine, but
the hissing noise will be heard for some weeks; when this subsides, add
honey and brandy, and paste over with brown paper. This wine should
remain in the cask a year before bottling.


                   TO MAKE ORANGE WINE WITH RAISINS

Take seven and one-half pounds of new Malaga raisins, pick them clean,
and chop them small. You must have five large Seville oranges; two of
them you must pare as thin as for preserving. Boil about two gallons
of soft water till a third part be consumed; let it cool a little.
Then put five quarts of it hot upon your raisins and orange peel; stir
it well together, cover it up, and when it is cold, let it stand five
days, stirring it up once or twice a day. Then pass it through a hair
sieve, and with a spoon press it as dry as you can, and put it in a
runlet fit for it, and put to it the rinds of the other three oranges,
cut as thin as the first; then make a syrup of the juice of five
oranges with one-quarter pound of white sugar. It must be made the day
before you tun it up; stir it well together, and stop it close. Let it
stand two months to clear, then bottle it up; it will keep three years,
and is better for keeping.


                                ORGEAT

Boil two quarts of milk with one stick of cinnamon, and let it stand
to be quite cold, taking out the cinnamon. Blanch four ounces of the
best sweet almonds, pound them well (in a marble mortar) with a little
rose-water; mix them well with the milk; sweeten to your taste. Let it
boil again for a few minutes; strain through a fine sieve till quite
smooth and free from almonds. Serve either cold or warm in handled
glasses.


                         TO MAKE PALERMO WINE

Take to every quart of water one pound of Malaga raisins, rub and cut
the raisins small, and put them to the water, and let them stand ten
days, stirring once or twice a day. You may boil the water an hour
before you put it to the raisins, and let it stand to cool. At ten
days’ end strain out your liquor, and put a little yeast to it; and at
three days’ end put it in the vessel, with one sprig of dried wormwood.
Let it be close stopped, and at three months’ end bottle it off.


                         TO MAKE PARSNIP WINE

To six pounds of parsnips, cut in slices, add two gallons of water;
boil them till they become quite soft. Squeeze the water out of them,
run it through a sieve, and add to every gallon three pounds of loaf
sugar. Boil the whole three-quarters of an hour, and when it is nearly
cold, add a little yeast. Let it stand ten days in a tub, stirring it
every day from the bottom, then put it in a cask for twelve months; as
it works over, fill it up every day.


                          PARSNIP WINE, NO. 2

Take one pound of parsnips cleaned and sliced. When the water boils,
put in the parsnips, and boil till they are perfectly tender; drain
through a sieve or colander without pressing. Immediately return
it to the copper with fourteen pounds of loaf sugar; it will soon
boil, being already hot, and what drips from the sieve may be added
afterwards; one and one-half ounces of hops, and boil it two hours.
Ferment with yeast; let it stand four days to work in a warm place; and
tun and paste paper over. It is most likely it will work up and burst
the paper, which must be renewed. It may be cleared with isinglass, but
will not require any brandy.


                          PARSNIP WINE, NO. 3

Take seven and one-half pounds of sliced parsnips, and boil until quite
soft in two and one-half gallons of water; squeeze the liquor well out
of them, run it through a sieve, and add three pounds of coarse lump
sugar to every gallon of liquor. Boil the whole for three-quarters of
an hour. When it is nearly cold, add a little yeast on toast. Let it
remain in a tub for ten days, stirring it from the bottom every day,
then put it into a cask for a year. As it works over, fill it up every
day.


                          TO MAKE PEACH WINE

Take three gallons cold soft water, four and one-quarter pounds refined
sugar, one pound honey, one-third ounce white tartar in fine powder,
ten or fourteen peaches. Ferment; then add six quarts of brandy. The
first division is to be put into a vat, and the day after, before the
peaches are put in, take the stones from them, break these and the
kernels, then put them and the pulp into a vat and proceed with the
general process.


                          PERRY OR PEAR CIDER

Make this according to directions for apple cider. Among the
caricatures of the day (just after Perry’s victory on Lake Erie, 1813)
was one representing John Bull, in the person of the King, seated,
with his hand pressed upon his stomach, indicating pain, which the
fresh juice of the pear, called perry, will produce. This caricature is
entitled “Queen Charlotte and Johnny Bull got their dose of Perry.”


                             PINEAPPLE RUM

To three gallons rum, made by the fruit method, add two pineapples
sliced, and one-half pound white sugar. Let it stand two weeks before
drawing off.


                               PLUM WINE

Take five pounds of Malaga raisins, pick, rub, and shred them, and put
them into a tub; then take one gallon of water, boil it an hour, and
let it stand till it is blood-warm; then put it to your raisins. Let
it stand nine or ten days, stirring it once or twice a day; strain
out your liquor, and mix it with one pint of damson juice. Put it in
a vessel, and when it has done working stop it close; at four or five
months bottle it.


                          POP, OR GINGER BEER

The principal difference between ginger pop and ginger beer is that the
former is bottled immediately, the other is first put in a barrel for
a few days. It is also usual to boil the ingredients for ginger beer,
which is not done for pop. Both are to be bottled in stone bottles, and
the corks tied or wired down. If properly done the corks and strings
will serve many times in succession; the moment the string is untied
the cork will fly out uninjured. The bottles as soon as empty should be
soaked a few hours in cold water, shaken about, and turned down, and
scalded immediately before using. The corks also must be scalded. On
one pound of coarse loaf or fine moist sugar, two ounces of cream of
tartar, one ounce of bruised ginger, pour one gallon of boiling water;
stir it well and cover up to cool, as the flavor of the ginger is apt
to evaporate. It is a good way to do thus far the last thing at night;
then it is just fit to set working the first thing in the morning. Two
large tablespoonfuls of yeast, stir to it one teacupful of the liquor.
Let it stand a few minutes in a warmish place, then pour it to the
rest; stir it well and cover up for eight hours. Be particular as to
time. If done earlier the bottles are apt to fly; if later, the beer
soon becomes vapid. Skim, strain, bottle, cork, and tie down. The cork
should not touch the beer. It will be fit for use next day. Lemon rind
and juice may be added, but are not necessary.


                                PORTER

Eight quarters pale malt, six quarters amber malt, two quarters brown
malt. Mash it twice, with fifty-five and forty-eight barrels of water,
then boil with one hundredweight of Kent hops, and set with ten gallons
yeast, seven pounds salt, two pounds flour. Twenty barrels of good
table beer may be had from the grains. If deficient in color, add burnt
malt.


                         PORTER, FOR BOTTLING

Five quarters pale malt, three quarters amber malt, two quarters brown
malt, burnt malt to color if required. Mash with twenty-four, fourteen
and eleven barrels of water, then boil with one hundredweight Kent
hops, and set with seven gallons yeast, three pounds salt. Mash the
grains for table beer.


                               PORT WINE

To ten gallons prepared cider, add one and one-half gallons good
port wine, two and one-half quarts wild grapes (clusters), two
ounces bruised rhatany root, three-quarters ounce tincture of kino,
three-quarters pound loaf sugar, one-half gallon spirits. Let this
stand ten days; color if too light, with tincture of rhatany, then rack
it off and fine it. This should be repeated until the color is perfect
and the liquid clear.


                          PORT WINE (BRITISH)

1. Two gallons damson juice, two gallons cider, three-quarters ounce
sloe juice, one pound sugar, one pound honey. Ferment, then add one
quart spirit, one gallon red cape, a little over one ounce of red
tartar (dissolved), the same of powder of catechu, one-tenth ounce
bruised ginger, one-tenth ounce cassia, a few cloves. Mix well with two
tablespoonfuls of brandy coloring.

2. Two pounds bullace, ten pounds damsons, one and one-half gallons
water. Boil the water, skim it, and pour it boiling hot on the fruit;
let it stand four or six days at least. During that time bruise the
fruit or squeeze it with your hands. Then draw or pour it off into a
cask, and to every gallon of liquor, put two pounds and a half of fine
sugar, or rather more; put some yeast on a slice of bread (warm) to
work it. When done working, put a little brandy into the cask and fill
it up. Bung it up close, and let it stand six or twelve months; then
bottle it off. This wine is nearer in flavor to port than any other. If
made with cold water, it will be equally as good, but of a different
color.

3. Five gallons cider, one gallon elder juice, one gallon port wine,
one and one-quarter pint brandy, one and one-fifth ounces red tartar,
one-fifth ounce catechu, one gill finings, one ounce logwood. Mix well
and bung close.


                          TO MAKE QUINCE WINE

Take your quinces when they are thoroughly ripe, wipe off the fur very
clean; then take out the cores, bruise them as you do apples for cider,
and press them, adding to every gallon of juice two and one-half
pounds of fine sugar. Stir it together till it is dissolved; then put
it into your cask, and when it has done working stop it close. Let it
stand till _March_ before you bottle it. You may keep it two or three
years; it will be the better.


                          QUINCE WINE, NO. 2

Twelve sliced quinces. Boil for quarter of an hour in one gallon water;
then add two pounds lump sugar. Ferment, and add one gallon lemon wine,
one pint spirit.


                              RAISIN WINE

There are various modes of preparing this wine, which is, perhaps,
when well made, the best of English wines. The following recipes are
considered good:

For raisin wine without sugar, put to every gallon of soft water eight
pounds of fresh Smyrna or Malaga raisins; let them steep one month,
stirring every day. Then drain the liquor and put it into the cask,
filling it up as it works over; this it will do for two months. When
the hissing has in a great measure subsided, add brandy and honey, and
paper as in the former articles. This wine should remain three years
untouched; it may then be drank from the cask, or bottled, and it will
be found excellent. Raisin wine is sometimes made in large quantities,
by merely putting the raisins in the cask, and filling it up with
water, the proportion as above; carefully pick out all stalks. In six
months rack the wine into fresh casks, and put to each the proportion
of brandy and honey. In cider countries and plentiful apple years, a
most excellent raisin wine is made by employing cider instead of water,
and steeping in it the raisins.


                          RAISIN WINE, NO. 2

Five pounds of raisins, four gallons of water. Put them into a cask.
Mash for a fortnight, frequently stirring, and leave the bung loose
until the active fermentation ceases; then add one and one-half pints
brandy. Well mix, and let it stand till fine. The quantity of raisins
and brandy may be altered to suit.


                          RAISIN WINE, NO. 3

Take two gallons of spring water, and let it boil half an hour; then
put into a stein pot two pounds of raisins stoned, two pounds of sugar,
the rind of two lemons, and the juice of four lemons; then pour the
boiling water on the things in the stein, and let it stand covered
four or five days. Strain it out and bottle it up; in fifteen or
sixteen days it will be fit to drink. It is a very pleasant drink in
hot weather.


                        RAISIN WINE WITH SUGAR

To every gallon of soft water four pounds of fresh raisins; put them
in a large tub; stir frequently, and keep it covered with a sack or
blanket. In about a fortnight the fermentation will begin to subside;
this may be known by the raisins remaining still. Then press the fruit
and strain the liquor. Have ready a wine cask, perfectly dry and warm,
allowing for each gallon one or one and one-half pounds of Lisbon
sugar; put this into a cask with the strained liquor. When half full,
stir well the sugar and liquor, and put in one-half pint of thick
yeast; then fill up with the liquor, and continue to do so while the
fermentation lasts, which will be a month or more.


                RAISIN WINE IN IMITATION OF FRONTIGNAC

For every gallon of wine required allow two pounds of raisins; boil
them one hour in water. Strain the boiling liquor on loaf sugar, two
pounds for every gallon; stir it well together. When cool put it in
the cask with a moderate quantity of yeast (as last article). When the
fermentation subsides, suspend in the cask a muslin bag containing
elder-flowers, in the proportion of one quart to three gallons of wine.
When perfectly clear, draw off the wine into bottles.


                        TO MAKE RASPBERRY WINE

Take your quantity of raspberries and bruise them, put them in an open
pot twenty-four hours; then squeeze out the juice, and to every gallon
of the juice put three pounds of fine sugar, two quarts of canary. Put
it into a stein or vessel, and when it has done working stop it close;
when it is fine, bottle it. It must stand two months before you drink
it.


                         RASPBERRY WINE, NO. 2

Take three pounds of raisins, wash, clean, and stone them thoroughly.
Boil two gallons of spring water for half an hour; as soon as it is
taken off the fire pour it into a deep stone jar, and put in the
raisins, with six quarts of raspberries and two pounds of loaf sugar.
Stir it well together, and cover them closely and set it in a cool
place; stir it twice a day, then pass it through a sieve. Put the
liquor into a close vessel, adding one pound more of loaf sugar; let it
stand for a day and a night to settle, after which bottle it, adding a
little more sugar.


                         RASPBERRY WINE, NO. 3

Pound your fruit and strain it through a cloth; then boil as much water
as juice of raspberries, and when it is cold put it to your squeezings.
Let it stand together five hours, then strain it and mix it with the
juice, adding to every gallon of this liquor two and one-half pounds
of fine sugar. Let it stand in an earthen vessel close covered a week,
then put it in a vessel fit for it, and let it stand a month, or till
it is fine; bottle it off.


                         RASPBERRY WINE, NO. 4

Take two gallons of raspberries, and put them in an earthen pot; then
take two gallons of water, boil it two hours, let it stand till it is
blood-warm, put it to the raspberries, and stir them well together;
let it stand twelve hours. Then strain it off, and to every gallon of
liquor put three pounds of loaf sugar. Set it over a clear fire, and
let it boil till all the scum is taken off. When it is cold, put it
into bottles and open the corks every day for a fortnight, and then
stop them close.


                           RASPBERRY VINEGAR

This may be made either by boiling down the juice with an equal weight
of sugar, the same as for jelly, and then mixing it with an equal
quantity of distilled vinegar, to be bottled with a glass of brandy
in each bottle; or, in a china bowl or stone jar (free from metallic
glaze) steep a quart of fresh-gathered raspberries in two quarts of
the best white wine vinegar. Next day strain the liquor on an equal
quantity of fresh fruit, and the next day do the same. After the third
steeping of fruit, dip a jelly-bag in plain vinegar, to prevent waste,
and strain the flavored vinegar through it into a stone jar. Allow to
each pint of vinegar one pound of loaf sugar powdered. Stir in the
sugar with a silver spoon, and, when dissolved, cover up the jar and
set it in a kettle of water. Keep it at boiling heat one hour; remove
the scum. When cold, add to each pint a glass of brandy, and bottle it.
This is a pleasant and useful drink in hot weather, or in sickness; one
pint of the vinegar to eight of cold water.


                             RHUBARB WINE

To each gallon of juice add one gallon of soft water, in which seven
pounds of brown sugar have been dissolved. Fill a keg or a barrel
with this proportion, leaving the bung out, and keep it filled with
sweetened water as it works over until clear; then bung down or bottle
as you desire. These stalks will furnish about three-fourths their
weight in juice, or from sixteen hundred to two thousand gallons of
wine to each acre of well cultivated plants. Fill the barrels and let
them stand until spring, and bottle, as any wine will be better in
glass or stone.


                          RHUBARB WINE, NO. 2

Cut in bits and crush five pounds of rhubarb; add the thin yellow rind
of a lemon, and one gallon of water, and let stand covered two days.
Strain off the liquid and add four pounds of sugar. Put this into a
small cask with the bung-hole covered with muslin, and let it work two
or three days.


                               ROOT BEER

Take one and one-half gallons of molasses, add five gallons of water
at 60° Fahr. Let this stand two hours; then pour into a barrel, and
add one-quarter pound powdered or bruised sassafras bark, one-quarter
pound powdered or bruised Wintergreen bark, one-quarter pound bruised
sarsaparilla root, one-half pint yeast, water enough to fill the small
barrel. Ferment for twelve hours and bottle.


                               ROSE WINE

Take a well-glazed earthen vessel and put into it three gallons of
rose-water drawn with a cold still. Put into that a sufficient quantity
of rose-leaves, cover it close and set it for an hour in a kettle or
copper of hot water, to take out the whole strength and tincture of
the roses; and when cold press the rose-leaves hard into the liquor,
and steep fresh ones in it, repeating it till the liquor has got the
full strength of the roses. To every gallon of the liquor put three
pounds of loaf sugar, and stir it well, that it may melt and disperse
in every part. Then put in a cask or convenient vessel to ferment, and
put in a piece of bread toast hard and covered with yeast. Let it stand
for thirty days, when it will be ripe and have a fine flavor, having
the whole scent and strength of the roses in it, and it may be greatly
improved by adding wine and spices to it. By this method of infusion,
wine of carnations, clove gilliflowers, violets, primroses, or any
other flower having a curious scent, may be made.


                               RUM SHRUB

One gallon raisin wine, six pounds of honey, ten gallons of
good-flavored rum.


                           TO MAKE SAGE WINE

Boil five quarts of water one-quarter of an hour, and when it is
blood-warm put five pounds of Malaga raisins, picked, rubbed, and
shred, into it with almost three and one-quarter quarts of red sage
shred, and a little of ale yeast. Stir all well together and let it
stand in a tub covered warm six or seven days; then strain it off and
put in a runlet. Let it work three or four days, and then stop it up.
When it has stood six or seven days put in a quart or two of Malaga
sherry, and when it is fine, bottle it.


                         SAGE WINE ANOTHER WAY

Take six pounds of Malaga raisins picked clean and shred small, and one
peck of green sage shred small; then boil one gallon of water. Let the
water stand till it is luke-warm, then put it in a tub to your sage and
raisins; let it stand five or six days, stirring it twice or thrice a
day. Then strain and press the liquor from the ingredients, put it in a
cask, and let it stand six months; then draw it clean off into another
vessel. Bottle it in two days; in a month or six weeks it will be fit
to drink, but best when it is a year old.


                 TO MAKE SARATOGA WINE OR ENGLISH SACK

To every quart of water put a sprig of rue, and to every gallon a
handful of fennel roots; boil these half an hour, then strain it out,
and to every gallon of this liquor put three pounds of honey. Boil it
two hours, and skim it well. When it is cold, pour it off, and turn it
into the vessel, or such cask as is fit for it. Keep it a year in the
vessel, and then bottle it. It is a very good sack.


                           SARSAPARILLA MEAD

One-half pound of Spanish sarsaparilla. Boil five hours, so as to
strain off one gallon. Add eight pounds sugar, five ounces of tartaric
acid. One-quarter of a wine glass of syrup to one gill of water, and
one-quarter of a teaspoonful of soda water, is a fair proportion for a
drink.


                     SCHIEDAM SCHNAPPS, TO IMITATE

To two and one-half gallons good common gin and five over proof, add
one and one-half pints strained honey, two and one-half pints clear
water, one-half pint white sugar syrup, one-half pint spirits of
nutmegs mixed with the nitric ether, one-half pint orange-flower water,
one cup pure water, one-tenth ounce acetic ether, one drop oil of
wintergreen dissolved with the acetic ether. Mix all the ingredients
well; if necessary fine with alum and salt of tartar.


                       TO MAKE SCURVY-GRASS WINE

Take the best large scurvy-grass tops and leaves, in May, June, or
July; bruise them well in a stone mortar. Put them in a well-glazed
earthen vessel and sprinkle them over with some powder of crystal of
tartar; then smear them with some virgin honey, and being covered close
let it stand twenty-four hours. Set water over a gentle fire, putting
to every gallon three pints of honey, and when the scum rises, take it
off and let it cool. Then put the stamped scurvy-grass into a barrel,
and pour the liquor to it, setting the vessel conveniently edgeways,
with a tap at the bottom. When it has been infused twenty-four hours,
draw off the liquor, strongly press the juice and moisture out of the
herb into the barrel or vessel, and put the liquor up again. Then put a
little new yeast to it, and suffer it to ferment three days, covering
the bung or vent with a piece of bread spread over with mustard-seed,
downward, in a cool place, and let it continue till it is fine and
drinks brisk. Drain off the finest part, leaving only the dregs behind;
afterward add more herb and ferment it with whites of eggs, flour, and
fixed nitre, very nice, or the juice of green grapes, if they are to be
had, to which add six pounds of syrup of mustard, all mixed and well
beaten together, to refine it down, and it will drink brisk, but it is
not very pleasant, being here inserted among artificial wines rather
for the sake of health than for the delightfulness of its taste.


                                SHERBET

In one quart of water boil six or eight sticks of rhubarb ten minutes;
strain the boiling liquor on the thin-shaved rind of a lemon. Add two
ounces of clarified sugar with a wine-glass of brandy. Stir the above,
and let it stand five or six hours before using.


                              SHERRY WINE

To five gallons prepared cider add one quart spirits, three-quarters
of a pound of raisins, three quarts good sherry, and a few drops oil
bitter almonds (dissolved in alcohol). Let it stand ten days, and draw
it off carefully. Fine it down, and again rack it into another cask.


                          LONDON SHERRY WINE

Twelve pounds chopped raisins, three gallons soft water, one pound
sugar, one-half ounce white tartar, two quarts cider. Let them stand
together in a close vessel one month; stir frequently. Then add one
quart of spirits, one-quarter pound wild cherries bruised. Let them
stand one month longer and fine with isinglass.


                             TO MAKE SHRUB

Take two quarts of brandy, and put it in a large bottle, adding to it
the juice of five lemons, the peels of two, and one-half a nutmeg. Stop
it up and let it stand three days, and add to it three pints of white
wine, one and one-half pounds of sugar. Mix it, strain it twice through
a flannel, and bottle it up. It is a pretty wine, and a cordial.


                              SPRUCE BEER

Boil a handful of hops and two handfuls of the chips of sassafras root,
in ten gallons of water. Strain it, and turn on, while hot, one gallon
of molasses, two spoonfuls of the essence of spruce, two spoonfuls of
ginger, one spoonful of pounded allspice. Put it into a cask, and when
cold enough, add one-half pint of good yeast. Stir it well; stop it
close. When clear, bottle and cork it.


                        STRAWBERRY WINE, NO. 1

Twelve gallons bruised strawberries, ten gallons cider, seven gallons
water, twenty-five pounds sugar. Ferment, then add one-half ounce
bruised orris root, one-half ounce bruised bitter almonds, one-half
ounce bruised cloves, six ounces red tartar.


                        STRAWBERRY WINE, NO. 2

Crush the berries and add one quart of water to one gallon of berries
and let stand twenty-four hours. Strain and add two and one-half pounds
of white sugar to one gallon of juice. Put in cask, with thin muslin
tacked over the bung-hole, and let ferment, keeping it full from a
quantity reserved for the purpose. If a small quantity is made, use
jugs or bottle. When fermentation ceases, add one pint of good whiskey
to the gallon, and bottle and seal securely. Ready for use in six weeks.


                         ROYAL STRAWBERRY ACID

Take three pounds of ripe strawberries, two ounces of citric acid, and
one quart of spring water. Dissolve the acid in the water, and pour it
on the strawberries, and let them stand in a cool place twenty-four
hours. Then drain the liquid off, and pour it on three more pounds
of fruit; let it stand twenty-four hours. Add to the liquid its own
weight of sugar; boil it three or four minutes in a porcelain-lined
preserve-kettle, lest metal may affect the taste, and when cool cork it
in bottles lightly for three days, then tightly, and seal them. Keep in
a dry and cool place. It is delicious for sick and well.


                          TO MAKE SUGAR WINE

Boil five and one-half quarts of spring water a quarter of an hour, and
when it is blood-warm put five pounds of Malaga raisins picked, rubbed,
and shred into it, with five quarts of red sage shred and one-half cup
of ale yeast; stir all well together, and let it stand in a tub covered
warm six or seven days, stirring it once a day. Then strain it out and
put it in a runlet; let it work three or four days, and stop it up.
When it has stood six or seven days, put in a quart or two of Malaga
sack, and when it is fine, bottle it.


                     TEARS OF THE WIDOW OF MALABAR

Five quarts of plain spirit at 18°, one-half ounce bruised cloves,
forty-eight grains bruised mace. Digest in a corked carboy for a week,
add burnt sugar to impart a slight color, filter, and add four and
one-half pounds white sugar, dissolved in one-half gallon of distilled
or filtered rain water. Some add two or three ounces of orange-flower
water. A pleasant liquor.


                              TOMATO WINE

Take ripe, fresh tomatoes, mash very fine, strain through a fine sieve,
sweeten with good sugar to suit the taste, set it away in an earthen or
glass vessel, nearly full, cover tight, with the exception of a small
hole for the refuse to work off through during its fermentation. When
it is done fermenting, it will become pure and clear. Then bottle and
cork tight. A little salt improves its flavor; age improves it.


                              TOMATO BEER

Gather the fruit once a week, stem, wash, and mash it. Strain through
a coarse linen bag, and to every gallon of the juice add one pound
of good moist brown sugar. Let it stand nine days, and then pour it
off from the pulp, which will settle in the bottom of the jar. Bottle
it closely, and the longer you keep it the better it is when you
want to use it. Take a pitcher that will hold as much as you want to
use,—for my family I use a gallon pitcher,—fill it nearly full of fresh
sweetened water, add some of the preparation already described, and a
few drops of essence of lemon, and you will find it equal to the best
lemonade, costing almost nothing. To every gallon of sweetened water I
add one-half tumbler of beer.


                          TO MAKE TURNIP WINE

Pare and slice a number of turnips, put them into a cider-press and
press out all the juice. To every gallon of juice add three pounds of
lump sugar. Have a vessel ready large enough to hold the juice, and
put one-half pint of brandy to every gallon. Pour in the juice and lay
something over the bung for a week—to see if it works; if it does, do
not bung it up until it is done working. Then stop it close for three
months, and draw it off into another vessel. When it is fine, bottle it.


                           WALNUT MEAD WINE

To every gallon of water put three and one-half pounds of honey, and
boil them together three-quarters of an hour. Then to every gallon of
liquor put about two dozen of walnut leaves; pour boiling liquor upon
them and let stand all night. Then take out the leaves and put in a
spoonful of yeast, and let it stand for two or three days. Then make it
up, and after it has stood for three months, bottle it.


                     WHORTLEBERRY OR BILBERRY WINE

Take one and one-half gallons of cold soft water, one and one-half
gallons cider, two gallons berries. Ferment. Mix five pounds sugar,
four-fifths ounce tartar in fine powder; add four-fifths ounce ginger
in powder, one-half handful lavender and rosemary leaves, one and
two-thirds pints British spirits.




                               BRANDIES




                             APPLE BRANDY

Take seven gallons of water and boil one-half, putting the other into
a barrel; add the boiling water to the cold, with one-half gallon of
molasses and a little yeast. Keep the bung-hole open until fermentation
ceases.


                           OLD APPLE BRANDY

One gallon of neutral spirits, one-half cup of decoction of tea, one
and one-half pints of alcoholic solution of starch, one-eighth ounce of
sulphuric acid. This is flavored with one-fourth ounce of the oil of
apples. Color with one ounce of sugar coloring.


                           BLACKBERRY BRANDY

One-quarter pound essence of blackberry, one quart blackberry juice,
one-quarter pound of gum arabic, one small barrel pure spirits.


                            CARAWAY BRANDY

Steep one ounce of caraway-seed and six ounces of loaf sugar with one
quart of brandy. Let it stand nine days and then draw off.


                          BLACK CHERRY BRANDY

Stone two pounds of black cherries and put on them one quart of brandy.
Bruise the stones in a mortar, and then add them to the brandy. Cover
them close and let them stand a month or six weeks. Then pour it clear
from the sediment and bottle it. Morello cherries, managed in this way,
make a fine cordial.


                         CHERRY BRANDY, NO. 1

For this purpose use either morello cherries or small black cherries.
Pick them from the stalks; fill the bottles nearly up to the necks,
then fill up with brandy (some people use whiskey, gin, or spirit
distilled from the lees of the wine). In three weeks or a month strain
off the spirit; to each quart add one pound of loaf sugar clarified,
and flavor with tincture of cinnamon or cloves.


                         CHERRY BRANDY, NO. 2

One of the best and most common ways of making cherry brandy is to
put the cherries (being first clean picked from the stalks) into a
vessel till it be about half-full; then fill up with rectified molasses
brandy, which is generally used for this compound, and when they have
been infused sixteen or eighteen days, draw off the liquor by degrees,
as wanted. When drawn off, fill the vessel a second time nearly to
the top, let it stand about a month, and then draw it off as there is
occasion. The same cherries may be used a third time by covering them
with overproof brandy and letting it infuse for six or seven weeks.
When drawn off for use, as much water must be added as the brandy was
overproof, and the cherries must be afterward pressed as long as any
liquor remains in them before being cast away. When drawn off the
second time, the liquor will be somewhat inferior to the first, when
more sugar, with a very little cinnamon and cloves beaten, may be added.


                         CHERRY BRANDY, NO. 3

To every five gallons of brandy made by the recipe for French brandy
add one and one-half quarts of wild black cherries, stones and all
bruised, one pound of crushed sugar. Let it stand for one week, then
draw or rack it off as it is wanted for use.

2. Two gallons good whiskey, one quart wild black berries, well bruised
with stones broken, one pound common almonds, shelled, one-tenth
ounce white sugar, one-tenth ounce cinnamon, one-tenth ounce cloves,
one-tenth ounce nutmeg, well bruised. Mix, and let them stand twelve
days, and draw off. This, with the addition of two gallons brandy,
makes most superior cherry brandy.


                         CHERRY BRANDY, NO. 4

To every four quarts of brandy put four pounds of red cherries, two
pounds of black, one quart of raspberries, with a few cloves, a stick
of cinnamon, and a little orange peel. Let these stand a month close
stopped; then bottle it off, putting a lump of sugar into every bottle.


                         CHERRY BRANDY, NO. 5

Take twelve pounds of cherries, half red and half black, mash or
squeeze them to pieces with the hands, and add to them two quarts of
brandy, letting them steep for twenty-four hours. Then put the mashed
cherries and liquor into a canvas bag, a little at a time, and press it
as long as it will run. Sweeten it with loaf sugar and let it stand a
month; then bottle it off, putting a lump of sugar in every bottle.


                             LEMON BRANDY

Put two and one-half quarts of water in one-half gallon of brandy. Take
one dozen of lemons, one pound of the best sugar, and one and one-half
pints of milk. Pare the lemons very thin, and lay the peel to steep in
the brandy twelve hours. Squeeze the lemons upon the sugar, then put
the water to it, and mix all the ingredients together. Boil the milk
and pour it in boiling. Let it stand twenty-four hours and then strain
it.


                             ORANGE BRANDY

Put the chips of six Seville oranges in one quart of brandy, and let
them steep a fortnight in a stone bottle close stopped. Boil two and
two-thirds pints of spring water with eight ounces of the finest sugar,
nearly an hour, very gently. Clarify the water and sugar with the white
of an egg; then strain it through a jelly-bag, and boil it nearly
half-away. When it is cold, strain the brandy into the syrup.


                             POPPY BRANDY

Take six quarts of the best and freshest poppies, cut off the black
ends, put them in a glass jar that will hold two gallons, and press
them in it, then pour over a gallon of brandy. Tightly cover the glass
jar and set it in the sun for a week or more, then squeeze out the
poppies with your hand, and sweeten the liquor to taste, adding an
ounce and a half of alkermes. Mix it well and bottle it up.


                           RASPBERRY BRANDY

Raspberry brandy is infused nearly after the same manner as cherry
brandy, and drawn off with about the same addition of brandy to what
is drawn off from the first, second, and third infusion, and dulcified
accordingly, first making it of a bright deep color, omitting cinnamon
and cloves in the first, but not in the second and third infusion.
The second infusion will be somewhat paler than the first, and must
be lightened in color by adding one pint cherry brandy, with five or
more gallons of raspberry brandy, and the third infusion will require
more cherry brandy to color it. It may be flavored with the juice of
elderberry.


                        RASPBERRY BRANDY, NO. 2

Take a pint of water and two quarts of brandy, and put them into a
pitcher large enough to hold them and four pints of raspberries. Put
in one-half pound of loaf sugar, and let it remain for a week close
covered. Then take a piece of flannel with a piece of holland over it,
and let it run through by degrees. It may be racked into other bottles
a week after, and then it will be perfectly fine.


                        RASPBERRY BRANDY, NO. 3

Scald the fruit in a stone jar set in a kettle of water, or on a hot
hearth. When the juice will run freely, strain it without pressing.
To every quart of juice allow one pound of loaf sugar. Boil it up and
skim; when quite clear pour out, and when cold add an equal quantity of
brandy. Shake them well together and bottle.




                               CORDIALS




                               CORDIALS

To filter cordials, cover the bottom of a sieve with clean
blotting-paper. Pour the liquor into it (having set a vessel underneath
to receive it), and let drip through the paper and through the sieve.
Renew the paper frequently and fasten it down with pins. This process
is slow, but makes the liquor beautifully clear.


                      TO MAKE ANISE-SEED CORDIAL

Take one-half pound bruised anise-seed, three gallons proof spirit,
one quart of water. Draw off two gallons, with a moderate fire. This
water should never be reduced below proof, because the large quantity
of oil with which it is impregnated will render it milky and foul when
brought down below proof. But if there is a necessity for doing this
the transparency may be restored by filtration.


                          BLACKBERRY CORDIAL

Mash and strain the berries through sieve. To one gallon of juice put
one pound of sugar. Boil and add one tablespoon of allspice, one
tablespoon of cloves. Cook till thick. When nearly cold add one quart
of whiskey or brandy. Bottle and seal.


                       BLACKBERRY CORDIAL, NO. 2

To one gallon of blackberry juice add four pounds of white sugar; boil
and skim off. Then add one ounce of cloves, one ounce of cinnamon, ten
grated nutmegs, and boil down till quite rich. Then let it cool and
settle. Afterward drain off, and add one pint of good brandy or whiskey.


                            CARAWAY CORDIAL

Take one teaspoonful of oil of caraway, four drops of cassia-lignea
oil, one drop of essence of orange peel, one drop of essence of lemon,
five quarts and a gill of spirits, one and three-fourths pounds of loaf
sugar. Make it up and fine it down.


                        CARAWAY CORDIAL, NO. 2

Take one gallon fifty per cent. spirit, one-eighth ounce oil of
caraway, which you dissolve in ninety-five per cent. spirit, one pound
sugar, one pound water. Dissolve your sugar in the water; mix, stir,
and filter.


                            CEDRAT CORDIAL

The cedrat is a species of citron, and very highly esteemed in Italy,
where it grows naturally. The fruit is difficult to be procured in this
country, but as the essential oil is often imported from Italy, it may
be made as follows: Take two ounces of the finest loaf sugar, powdered.
Put it into a glass mortar, with sixty drops of the essence of cedrat;
rub them together with a glass pestle, and put them into a glass
alembic with two quarts of fine proof spirit and one pint of water.
Place the alembic in a bath, heat and draw off one-half gallon, or till
the feints begin to rise; then dulcify with fine sugar.

This is considered the finest cordial yet known; it will therefore
be necessary to be particularly careful that the spirit is perfectly
clean, and as much as possible free from any flavor of its own.


                           CINNAMON CORDIAL

This is seldom made with cinnamon, but with either the essential oil
or bark of cassia. It is preferred colored, and therefore may be well
prepared by simple fermentation. If the oil be used, one dram will be
found enough for two or three gallons of spirit. The addition of two
or three drops each of essence of lemon and orange peel, with about a
spoonful of essence of cardamoms to each gallon, will improve it. Some
persons add to the above quantity one dram of cardamom seeds and one
ounce each of dried orange and lemon peel. One ounce of oil of cassia
is considered to be equal to eight pounds of the buds or bark. If
wanted dark, it may be colored with burnt sugar. The quantity of sugar
is one and one-half pounds to the gallon.


                        STRONG CINNAMON CORDIAL

Take one pound of fine cinnamon bruised, two gallons of clear rectified
spirit, and one pint of water. Put them into the still, and digest them
twenty-four hours with a gentle heat, after which draw off by a pretty
strong heat.


                            CITRON CORDIAL

Take six ounces of dry yellow rinds of citrons, two ounces of orange
peel, one and one-half ounces bruised nutmegs, five quarts of proof
spirit, one pint water. Digest with a gentle heat, then draw off ten
gallons in a bath; heat, and dulcify with fine sugar.


                         CITRON CORDIAL, NO. 2

One-half pound yellow rind of citrons, two ounces orange peel,
one-third ounce bruised nutmegs, two and one-sixth gallons proof
spirit; distill or macerate, add water sufficient, and one-half pound
of fine lump sugar for every gallon of the cordial.


                             CLOVE CORDIAL

Take one-quarter of a pound of cloves, bruised, one ounce pimento, or
allspice, two gallons proof spirit. Digest the mixture twelve hours in
a gentle heat, and then draw off with a pretty brisk fire. The water
may be colored red, either by strong tincture of cochineal, alkanet, or
corn poppy-flowers. It may be dulcified at pleasure with refined sugar.


                         CLOVE CORDIAL, NO. 2

One-quarter ounce bruised cloves, or one-quarter dram essential oil,
to every gallon of proof spirit. If distilled, it should be drawn over
with a pretty quick fire. It is preferred of a very deep color, and is
therefore strongly colored with poppy-flowers or cochineal, or more
commonly with brandy coloring, or red sanders wood. It should have
three pounds of sugar to the gallon, and this need not be very fine.
The addition of one-quarter dram of bruised pimento, or two drops of
the oil for every ounce of cloves, improves this cordial.


                           CORIANDER CORDIAL

One-third pound coriander seeds, one-third ounce of caraways, and the
peel and juice of one-half orange to every gallon of proof spirit.


                            GINGER CORDIAL

Pick one pound of large white currants from their stalks, lay them in
a basin, and strew over them the rind of an orange and a lemon cut
very thin, or one-half teaspoonful of essence of lemon, and one ounce
and one-half of the best ground ginger, and one quart of good whiskey.
Let all lie for twenty-four hours. If it taste strong of the ginger,
then strain it; if not, let it lie for twelve hours longer. To every
quart of strained juice add one pound of loaf sugar pounded. When the
sugar is quite dissolved, and the liquor appears clear, bottle it.
This cordial is also extremely good made with raspberries instead of
currants.


                             GOLD CORDIAL

Take one pound of the roots of angelica, sliced, two ounces caraway
seeds, two ounces cinnamon, a few cloves, one-quarter pound figs
sliced, one-quarter pound licorice root sliced, two and three-quarters
gallons proof spirit, one-half gallon water. Digest two days and draw
off by a gentle heat till the feints begin to rise; hanging in a piece
of linen, fastened to the mouth of the worm one-quarter ounce of
English saffron. Then dissolve two pounds of sugar in one and one-half
pints of rose-water, and add to it the distilled liquor. The above
cordial derives its name from a quantity of leaf gold being formerly
added to it, but this is now generally disused.


                         LEMON CORDIAL, NO. 1

Pare off very thin the yellow rind of some fine lemons. Cut the lemons
in half and squeeze out the juice. To each pint of the juice allow
one-half pound of loaf sugar. Mix the juice, the peel, and the sugar
together. Cover it and let it set twenty-four hours. Then mix it with
an equal quantity of white brandy. Put it into a jug, and let it
set a month. Then strain through a linen bag and afterward through
blotting-paper before you bottle it.


                         LEMON CORDIAL, NO. 2

Take one pound of dried lemon peel, two and one-quarter gallons proof
spirit, one quart water. Draw off two gallons by a gentle fire, and
dulcify with fine sugar.


                          LIME JUICE CORDIAL

Lime juice cordial that will keep good for any length of time may be
made as follows: six pounds sugar, four pints water, four ounces citric
acid, one-half ounce boric acid. Dissolve by the aid of a gentle heat,
and when cold add sixty ounces refined lime juice, four ounces tincture
of lemon peel, water to make up two gallons.


                            LOVAGE CORDIAL

Take two-thirds ounce of the fresh roots of lovage, two-thirds ounce
of valerian, two-thirds ounce of celery, two-thirds ounce of sweet
fennel, one-sixth ounce of essential oil of caraway, one-sixth ounce of
savin, two-thirds of a cup spirit of wine, two gallons proof spirit,
two pounds of loaf sugar. Steep the roots and seeds in the spirits for
fourteen days; then dissolve the oils in the spirit of wine, and add
them to the undulcified cordial drawn off from the other ingredients.
Dissolve the sugar in the water for making, and fine, if necessary,
with alum.


                             NOYAU CORDIAL

Blanch and pound very fine two pounds of the best bitter almonds and
one-half pound of sweet almonds. Add the thinly pared rind of two
lemons, three tablespoonfuls of boiled milk which has become cold. Put
all together into a jar, and add two quarts of old whiskey. Cork up the
jar, and let it stand for six weeks, shaking the jar every day. At the
end of that time strain the liquor, and to every quart of the liquor
add three pints of clarified syrup, and filter through blotting-paper.
The almonds that are strained from the liquor make a nice flavoring
for puddings, by putting them into a wide-mouthed bottle and pouring
whiskey over them.


                            ORANGE CORDIAL

Take five pounds of the yellow part of fresh orange peel, ten and
one-half gallons of proof spirit, two gallons of water. Draw off ten
gallons, with a gentle fire.


                       PEPPERMINT CORDIAL, NO. 1

Take one gallon and a gill of rectified spirits, one pound of loaf
sugar, one tablespoonful of wine, oil of peppermint to taste, water,
as much as will fill the cask, which should be set upon end after the
whole has been well roused, and a cock for drawing off placed in it.


                       PEPPERMINT CORDIAL, NO. 2

One gallon of rectified spirits, one in five under hydrometer proof,
one pound of loaf sugar, one tablespoonful of spirits of wine, one and
one-third pennyweights of oil of peppermint, and as much water as will
fill up the cask, which should be set on end.


                            QUINCE CORDIAL

Pare your quinces, and scrape them to the core. Put all the scrapings
into a tureen, and see that there are no seeds among them. Let the
scrapings remain covered in the tureen for two days; then put them
into a linen bag and squeeze out all the juice. Measure it and mix it
with an equal quantity of white brandy. To each pint of the mixture
add one-half pound of loaf sugar and a little cinnamon and cloves.
Put it into a jug and let it infuse for two months. Drain it through
blotting-paper and then bottle it. This cordial improves with age and
is excellent.


                             ROSE CORDIAL

Take one pound of the leaves of full-blown red roses. Put them into one
quart of luke-warm water, and let them infuse for two days in a covered
vessel. Then squeeze them through a linen bag, to press out all the
liquid, and take as much white brandy as you have of the decoction of
roses. To one pint of the infusion add one-half pound of loaf sugar,
and a very small quantity of coriander and cinnamon. Put in a jug and
let it set for two weeks, then filter it through blotting-paper, and
put it into bottles.


                           RASPBERRY CORDIAL

Take one quart of raspberry juice and one-half pint of cherry juice,
the fruit having been squeezed through a linen bag after the cherries
have been stoned. Mix the juices together, and dissolve in them two
pounds of loaf sugar. Then add two quarts of French brandy. Put it into
a jug and let it stand five weeks. Afterward strain it and bottle for
use.


                    STRAWBERRY OR RASPBERRY CORDIAL

Sugar down the berries overnight, using more sugar than you would
for the table, about half as much again. In the morning lay them in
a hair sieve over the basin; let them remain until evening, so as to
thoroughly drain. Then put the juice in a thick flannel bag; let it
drain all night, being careful not to squeeze it, as that takes out the
brightness and clearness. All this should be done in a cool cellar, or
it will be apt to sour. Add brandy in the proportion of one-third the
quantity of juice, and as much more sugar as the taste demands. Bottle
it tightly. It will keep six or eight years, and is better at last than
at first.


                            WHISKEY CORDIAL

Take one ounce of cinnamon, one ounce of ginger, one ounce of coriander
seed, one-half ounce of mace, one-half ounce of cloves, one-half ounce
of cubebs. Add three gallons of proof spirit and two and one-half
quarts of water, and distill. Now tie up one and one-third ounces of
English saffron, one pound of raisins (stoned), one pound dates, three
ounces licorice root. Let these stand twelve hours in two and one-half
quarts of water; strain, and add it to the above. Dulcify the whole
with fine sugar.




                               LIQUEURS




                         ANISETTE DE BOURDEAUX

Take nine ounces sugar, six drops aniseed. Rub them together, and add,
by degrees, two pints spirits of wine, four pints water. Filter.


                          CRÊME DES BARBADOES

Take one dozen middling sized lemons, three large citrons, fourteen
pounds loaf sugar, one-quarter pound fresh balm leaves, five quarts
spirits of wine, seven quarts of water. Cut lemons and citrons in thin
slices and put them into a cask, pour upon them the spirit of wine,
bung down close, and let it stand ten days or a fortnight; then break
the sugar, and boil it for one-half hour in the water, skimming it
frequently. Then chop the balm leaves, put them into a large pan, and
pour upon them the boiling liquor, and let it stand till quite cold;
then strain it through a lawn sieve, and put it to the spirits, etc.,
in the cask. Bung down close, and in a fortnight draw it off. Strain it
through a jelly-bag and let remain to fine; then bottle it.


                     CRÊME DE NOYAU DE MARTINIQUE

Take twenty pounds of loaf sugar, three gallons of spirit of wine,
three pints of orange-flower water, one and one-quarter pounds of
bitter almonds, two drams of essence of lemon, four and one-half
gallons of water. The produce will exceed eight gallons. Put two pounds
of the loaf sugar into a jug or can, pour upon it the essence of lemon,
and one quart of the spirit of wine. Stir till the sugar is dissolved,
and the essence completely incorporated. Bruise the almonds and put
them into a four-gallon stone bottle or cask, add the remainder of
the spirit of wine, and the mixture from the jug or can. Let it stand
a week or ten days, shaking it frequently. Then add the remainder of
the sugar, and boil it in the four and one-half gallons of water for
three-quarters of an hour, taking off the scum as it rises. When cold,
put it in a cask; add the spirit, almonds, etc., from the stone bottle,
and lastly the orange-water. Bung it down close and let it stand three
weeks or a month; then strain it off in a jelly-bag, and when fine,
bottle it off. When the pink is wanted, add cochineal, in powder, at
the rate of one-half dram or two scruples to one quart.


                   CRÊME D’ORANGE OF SUPERIOR FLAVOR

Take one dozen middling sized oranges, one and one-quarter pints
orange-flower water, six pounds loaf sugar, two and two-thirds quarts
spirit of wine, one-half ounce tincture of saffron, four and two-thirds
quarts water. Cut the oranges in slices, put them in a cask, add the
spirit and orange-flower water, let it stand a fortnight. Then boil the
sugar in the water for one-half hour, pour it out, and let it stand
till cold; then add it to the mixture in the cask, and put in the
tincture of saffron. Let it remain a fortnight longer; then strain, and
proceed as directed in the recipe for Crême de Barbadoes, and a very
fine cordial will be produced.


                           EAU DE BARBADOES

Take one ounce of fresh orange peel, four ounces of fresh lemon peel,
one dram coriander, four pints proof spirit. Distill in a bath heat,
and add white sugar in powder.


                            EAU DE BIGARADE

Take the outer or yellow part of the peels of seven bigarades (a kind
of orange), one-quarter ounce of nutmegs, one-eighth ounce of mace,
one-half gallon of fine proof spirit, one quart of water. Digest all
these together two days in a close vessel, after which draw off a
gallon with a gentle fire, and dulcify with fine sugar.


                              EAU DEVINE

Take one-half gallon of spirit of wine, one-half dram essence of lemons
and one-half dram essence of bergamot. Distill in a bath heat, add two
pounds sugar, dissolved in one gallon of pure water, and lastly two and
one-half ounces of orange-flower water.


                            ELEPHANT’S MILK

Take two ounces gum benzoin, one pint spirit of wine, two and one-half
pints boiling water. When cold, strain and add one and one-half pounds
sugar.


                            HUILE DE VENUS

Take six ounces of flowers of wild carrot, picked, ten pints spirit
of wine. Distill in a bath heat. To the spirit add as much syrup of
capillaire; it may be colored with cochineal.


                              LIGNODELLA

Take the thin peel of three oranges and three lemons; steep them in
one-half gallon of brandy or rum, close stopped for two or three days.
Then take three quarts of water and one and one-half pounds of loaf
sugar clarified with the whites of two eggs. Let it boil one-quarter
hour, then strain it through a fine sieve, and let it stand till cold;
strain the brandy with the peels, add the juice of three oranges and
five lemons to each gallon. Keep it close stopped up five weeks, then
bottle it.


                              MARASCHINO

One gallon proof whiskey, two quarts of water, dissolve four pounds of
sugar, one-third dram oil of bergamot, one-third dram oil of cloves,
two drops oil of cinnamon, two-thirds ounce of nutmegs, bruised, five
ounces of orange peel, one ounce of bitter almonds, bruised, one-third
dram oil of lemon. Dissolve the oil in alcohol; color with cochineal
and burnt sugar.


                        MARASQUIN DE GROSEILLES

Take eight and one-half pounds of gooseberries, quite ripe, one pound
black cherry leaves. Bruise and ferment; distill and rectify the
spirits. To each pint of this spirit add as much distilled water, and
one pound of sugar.


                                NECTAR

Take three gallons of red ratafia, one-quarter ounce of cassia-oil, and
an equal quantity of the oil of caraway seeds. Dissolve in a little
spirit of wine, and make up with orange wine so as to fill up the jug.
Sweeten, if wanted, by adding a small lump of sugar in the glass.


                                 NOYAU

Take one and one-half gallons of French brandy, one in five, six ounces
of the best French prunes, two ounces of celery, three ounces of the
kernels of apricots, nectarines, and peaches, and one ounce of bitter
almonds, all gently bruised, two pennyweights of essence of orange
peel, two pennyweights of essence of lemon peel, one and one-half
pounds of loaf sugar. Let the whole stand ten days or a fortnight. Then
draw off, and add to the clear noyau as much rose-water as will make up
to two gallons.


                                RATAFIA

This is a liquor prepared from different kinds of fruits, and is of
different colors, according to the fruits made use of. These fruits
should be gathered when in their greatest perfection, and the largest
and most beautiful of them chosen for the purpose. The following is
the method for making red ratafia, fine and soft: Take twelve pounds of
the black-heart cherries, two pounds black cherries, one and one-half
pounds raspberries, one and one-half pounds strawberries. Pick the
fruit from their stalks, and bruise them, in which state let them
continue twelve hours; then press out the juice, and to every pint of
it add one-half pound of sugar. When the sugar is dissolved, run the
whole through the filtering-bag, and add to it three pints of proof
spirit. Then take two ounces of cinnamon, two ounces mace, one dram
cloves. Bruise these spices, put them into an alembic with one-half
gallon of proof spirit and one quart of water, and draw off a gallon
with a brisk fire. Add as much of the spicy spirit to the red ratafia
as will render it agreeable; about one-quarter is the usual proportion.


                            RATAFIA, NO. 2

Ratafia may be made with the juice of any fruit. Take six quarts cherry
juice and two pounds sugar, which you dissolve in the juice. Steep in
five quarts brandy ten days. One dram cinnamon, twelve cloves, eight
ounces peach leaves, four ounces bruised cherry kernels. Filter, mix
both liquids, and filter again.


                            RATAFIA, NO. 3

Take four ounces of nutmegs, five pounds of bitter almonds, nine pounds
Lisbon sugar, five grains ambergris. Infuse these ingredients three
days in five gallons of proof spirit, and filter it through a flannel
bag for use. The nutmegs and bitter almonds must be bruised, and the
ambergris rubbed with the Lisbon sugar in a marble mortar, before they
are infused in the spirit.


                          RATAFIA D’ANGELIQUE

Take one-half dram of angelica seed, two ounces stalks of angelica,
two ounces bitter almonds, blanched, six pints proof spirit, one pound
white sugar. Digest, strain, and filter.


                        RATAFIA DE BRON DE NOIX

Take sixty young walnuts whose shells are not yet hardened, four pints
brandy, twelve ounces sugar, fifteen grains mace, fifteen grains
cinnamon, fifteen grains cloves. Digest for two or three months, press
out the liquor, filter, and keep it for two or three years.


                        TO MAKE RATAFIA DE CAFÉ

Take one-half pound of roasted coffee, ground, two quarts proof spirit,
ten ounces sugar. Digest for a week.


                           RATAFIA DE CASSIS

Take three pounds of ripe black currants, one-quarter dram cloves,
one-quarter dram cinnamon, nine pints proof spirit, one and
three-quarters pounds sugar. Digest for a fortnight.


                          RATAFIA DES CERISES

Take four pounds morello cherries, with their kernels bruised, four
pints proof spirit. Digest for a month, strain with expression, and
then add three-quarters pound of sugar.


                          RATAFIA DE CHOCOLAT

Take one pound Curacoa cocoanuts roasted, one-half pound West India
cocoanuts, roasted, one gallon proof spirit. Digest for a fortnight,
strain, and then add one and one-half pounds sugar, thirty drops
tincture of vanilla.


                         DRY OR SHARP RATAFIA

Take fifteen pounds of cherries, fifteen pounds of gooseberries, three
and one-half pounds mulberries, five pounds raspberries. Pick all
these fruits clean from their stalks, etc., bruise them, and let them
stand twelve hours, but do not suffer them to ferment. Press out the
juice, and to every pint add three ounces of sugar. When the sugar is
dissolved, run it through the filtering bag, and to every five pints
of liquor add four pints of proof spirit, together with the same
proportion of spirit drawn from spices.


                          RATAFIA DE GRENOBER

Take two pounds of small wild black cherries, with their kernels
bruised, one gallon proof spirit. Digest for a month, strain, and add
two pounds of sugar. A little citron peel may also be added at pleasure.


                           RATAFIA DE NOYAU

Take of peach or apricot kernels, with their shells bruised, in number
one hundred and twenty, four pints proof spirit, ten ounces sugar.
Some reduce the spirit of wine to proof with the juice of apricots or
peaches, to make this liquor.


                      RATAFIA D’ECORCES D’ORANGES

Take two ounces of fresh peel of Seville oranges, one-half gallon proof
spirit, one-half pound sugar. Digest for six hours.


                      RATAFIA DE THURO D’ORANGES

Take two pounds of fresh flowers of orange-tree, one gallon proof
spirit, one and one-half pounds of sugar. Digest for six hours.


                         RATAFIA A LA VIOLETTE

Take two drams Florentine orris root, one ounce archel, four pints
spirit of wine. Digest, strain, and add four pounds sugar.


                           USQUEBAUGH, NO. 1

Usquebaugh is a strong compound liquor, chiefly taken by the dram.
It is made in the highest perfection at Drogheda, in Ireland. The
following are the ingredients: Take two quarts of best brandy,
one-half pound raisins, stoned, one-half ounce nutmegs, one-half ounce
cardamoms, one-quarter ounce saffron, rind of one-half Seville orange,
one-half pound brown sugar candy. Shake these well every day for at
least fourteen days, and it will at the expiration of that time be
ready to be fined for use.


                           USQUEBAUGH, NO. 2

Take one ounce of nutmegs, one ounce of cloves, one ounce of cinnamon,
two ounces of the seed of anise, two ounces of the seed of caraway,
two ounces of the seed of coriander, one-quarter pound of licorice
root sliced. Bruise the seeds and spices, and put them together with
the licorice, into the still with five and one-half gallons of proof
spirit, and one gallon of water. Distill with a pretty brisk fire.
As soon as the still begins to work to the nozzle of the worm, take
one-quarter ounce of English saffron, tied up in a cloth that the
liquor may run through it, and extract all its tincture. When the
operation is finished, sweeten with fine sugar. This liquor may be
much improved by the following additions: Digest two pounds of stoned
raisins, one and one-half pounds of dates, one pound of sliced licorice
root, in one gallon of water, for twelve hours. When the liquor is
strained off, and has deposited all sediment, decant it gently into a
vessel containing the usquebaugh.


                               THE END.




                                 Index


  PAGE

  Introduction, 11

  General Directions for Making Wines, 15

  Coloring for Wines, 17

  Fining or Clearing Wine, 17

  To Flavor Wine, 17

  To Mellow Wine, 18

  To Remove the Taste of the Cask from Wine, 18

  To Remove Ropiness from Wine, 18

  To Restore Wine, When Sour or Sharp, 18

  To Make Apple Wine, 19

  Apricock Wine, 19

  Balm Wine, 20

  Barley Wine, 20

  To Make Beer and Ale from Pea-shells, 21

  Birch Wine, 21

  Blackberry Wine, 22

  Blackberry Wine (Other Methods of Making), 22

  Fine Brandy Shrub, 24

  American Champagne, 24

  Champagne Cup, 25

  British Champagne, 25

  Burgundy Champagne, 26

  Champagne Cider, 26

  Champagne Cider, No. 2, 27

  English Champagne, or the fine Currant Wine, To Make, 27

  Sham Champagne, 28

  Cheap and Agreeable Table Beer, 28

  Cherry Bounce, 28

  Cherry Bounce, No. 2, 29

  Cherry Bounce, No. 3, 29

  Cherry Wine. 30

  Cherry Wine, No. 2, 30

  General Rules for Making Cider, 31

  To Can Cider, 34

  Boiling Cider, 35

  To Clear Cider, 36

  Cider, to Preserve and Keep Sweet, 36

  Cider Champagne, 37

  Cherry Cider, 37

  Devonshire Cider, 38

  French Cider, 39

  Western Cider, 39

  Cider without Apples, 40

  Cider Wine, 41

  Clary Wine, 41

  Fine Clary Wine, 42

  Clover Wine, 42

  Cock Ale, 43

  Cowslip Wine, 43

  Cowslip or Clary Wine, No. 2, 44

  Currant Shrub, 46

  Currant Wine, 46

  Currant Wine, No. 2, 46

  Currant Wine, No. 3, 48

  Currant Wine, No. 4, 49

  Currant or Gooseberry Wine, without Boiling, 49

  Cypress Wine, Imitation of, 50

  Daisy Wine, 51

  Dandelion Wine, 51

  Damson Wine, 51

  Damson, or Black Cherry Wine, 52

  Ebulum, 52

  Elder-Flower Wine, 53

  Elder Wine, 53

  Elderberry Wine, 54

  Elder Wine, No. 2, 54

  Elder Wine, No. 3, 55

  Elder Wine (Flavored with Hops), 56

  Elder Wine, to make at Christmas, 57

  Elder-Flower Water, 58

  English Fig Wine, 59

  Frontignac Wine, 59

  Ginger Beer, 60

  Ginger Beer, No. 2, 61

  Ginger Wine, 61

  Gooseberry Wine, To Make, 62

  Gooseberry Wine, 62

  Gooseberry Wine, No. 2, 63

  Gooseberry and Currant Wine, 64

  Pearl Gooseberry Wine, 65

  Red Gooseberry Wine, 65

  Red and White Gooseberry Wine, 66

  White Gooseberry or Champagne Wine, 66

  Unfermented Grape Juice, 66

  Grape Wine, 67

  Grape Wine, No. 2, 68

  Grape Wine, No. 3, 69

  Hop Beer, 69

  Juniper-Berry Wine, 70

  Koumiss, a Tartar Wine, 70

  Koumiss, 71

  Lemon Wine, To Make, 71

  Lemon Wine, No. 2, 72

  Madeira Wine, 72

  Malt Wine, or English Sherry, 72

  Mead, 73

  Small White Mead, 74

  Strong Mead, To Make, 74

  Mead, Metheglin, or Honey Wine, 75

  Metheglin, 76

  Molasses Beer, 76

  Morello Wine, 76

  Morello Cherry Wine, 77

  Mountain Wine, 77

  Mulberry Wine, 77

  Noyau, 78

  Orange Wine, To Make, 79

  Orange or Lemon Wine, Boiled, 79

  Orange or Lemon Wine without Boiling, 80

  Orange Wine with Raisins, To Make, 81

  Orgeat, 82

  Palermo Wine, To Make, 82

  Parsnip Wine, To Make, 83

  Parsnip Wine, No. 2, 83

  Parsnip Wine, No. 3, 84

  Peach Wine, To Make, 84

  Perry or Pear Cider, 85

  Pineapple Rum, 85

  Plum Wine, 85

  Pop, or Ginger Beer, 86

  Porter, 87

  Porter, for Bottling, 87

  Port Wine, 88

  Port Wine (British), 88

  Quince Wine, To Make, 89

  Quince Wine, No. 2, 90

  Raisin Wine, 90

  Raisin Wine, No. 2, 91

  Raisin Wine, No. 3, 91

  Raisin Wine with Sugar, 92

  Raisin Wine in Imitation of Frontignac, 92

  Raspberry Wine, 93

  Raspberry Wine, No. 2, 93

  Raspberry Wine, No. 3, 94

  Raspberry Wine, No. 4, 94

  Raspberry Vinegar, 95

  Rhubarb Wine, 96

  Rhubarb Wine, No. 2, 96

  Root Beer, 96

  Rose Wine, 97

  Rum Shrub, 98

  Sage Wine, To Make, 98

  Sage Wine Another Way, 98

  Saratoga Wine or English Sack, To Make, 99

  Sarsaparilla Mead, 99

  Schiedam Schnapps, To Imitate, 100

  Scurvy-grass Wine, To Make, 100

  Sherbet, 101

  Sherry Wine, 102

  London Sherry Wine, 102

  Shrub, To Make, 102

  Spruce Beer, 103

  Strawberry Wine, No. 1, 103

  Strawberry Wine, No. 2, 103

  Royal Strawberry Acid, 104

  Sugar Wine, To Make, 104

  Tears of the Widow of Malabar, 105

  Tomato Wine, 105

  Tomato Beer, 106

  Turnip Wine, To Make, 106

  Walnut Mead Wine, 107

  Whortleberry or Bilberry Wine, 107


  BRANDIES

  Apple Brandy, 111

  Old Apple Brandy, 111

  Blackberry Brandy, 111

  Caraway Brandy, 111

  Black Cherry Brandy, 112

  Cherry Brandy, No. 1, 112

  Cherry Brandy, No. 2, 112

  Cherry Brandy, No. 3, 113

  Cherry Brandy, No. 4, 114

  Cherry Brandy, No. 5, 114

  Lemon Brandy, 114

  Orange Brandy, 115

  Poppy Brandy, 115

  Raspberry Brandy, 116

  Raspberry Brandy, No. 2, 116

  Raspberry Brandy, No. 3, 117


  CORDIALS

  Anise-seed Cordial, To Make, 121

  Blackberry Cordial, 121

  Blackberry Cordial, No. 2, 122

  Caraway Cordial, 122

  Caraway Cordial, No. 2, 122

  Cedrat Cordial, 123

  Cinnamon Cordial, 123

  Strong Cinnamon Cordial, 124

  Citron Cordial, 124

  Citron Cordial, No. 2, 125

  Clove Cordial, 125

  Clove Cordial, No. 2, 125

  Coriander Cordial, 126

  Ginger Cordial, 126

  Gold Cordial, 127

  Lemon Cordial, No. 1, 127

  Lemon Cordial, No. 2, 128

  Lime Juice Cordial, 128

  Lovage Cordial, 128

  Noyau Cordial, 129

  Orange Cordial, 129

  Peppermint Cordial, No. 1, 130

  Peppermint Cordial, No. 2, 130

  Quince Cordial, 130

  Rose Cordial, 131

  Raspberry Cordial, 131

  Strawberry or Raspberry Cordial, 132

  Whiskey Cordial, 132


  LIQUEURS

  Anisette de Bourdeaux, 137

  Crême des Barbadoes, 137

  Crême de Noyau de Martinique, 138

  Crême d’Orange of Superior Flavor, 139

  Eau de Barbadoes, 139

  Eau de Bigarade, 139

  Eau Devine, 140

  Elephant’s Milk, 140

  Huile de Venus, 140

  Lignodella, 140

  Maraschino, 141

  Marasquin de Groseilles, 141

  Nectar, 142

  Noyau, 142

  Ratafia, 142

  Ratafia, No. 2, 143

  Ratafia, No. 3, 144

  Ratafia d’Angelique, 144

  Ratafia de Bron de Noix, 144

  Ratafia de Café, 145

  Ratafia de Cassis, 145

  Ratafia des Cerises, 145

  Ratafia de Chocolat, 145

  Dry or Sharp Ratafia, 145

  Ratafia de Grenober, 146

  Ratafia de Noyau, 146

  Ratafia d’Ecorces d’Oranges, 146

  Ratafia de Thuro d’Oranges, 147

  Ratafia a la Violette, 147

  Usquebaugh, No. 1, 147

  Usquebaugh, No. 2, 147





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OLD-TIME RECIPES FOR HOME MADE WINES, CORDIALS AND LIQUEURS FROM FRUITS, FLOWERS, VEGETABLES, AND SHRUBS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


